We can put this, yeah, absolutely.
This way.
No answer. I just- One more minute.
So It's, he does come right on the minute he
just said.
You really don't want to?
Well, it's not our problem.
No, it's Simon's. Right.
I'll just pause it.
Should be here. Right.
Well, still got a minute. Still got a minute.
Probably right on the minute. He can't- Get in.
Keep going. You want a pass? No,
it's all
right.
Oh, there you go. You saw him.
Sir? He's coming. He's just coming. Yep.
He's on time. There he is.
See.
Just on time
Phone calls flying for get you here.
Right. Okay. We can now start. So
welcome,
Minister, and welcome to all the officials as well. Good to have you here.
We
usually open with
some comments, but I know you've already given us some comments in writing, so
say what you wanted to say, and otherwise we'll go straight to questions.
All right. Good morning, and thank you for the chance to deliver the goods for Rail
once again.
We are joined by Kiwi Rail chair, Suzanne Tindall,
Ferry Holdings chair, Chris McKenzie, and their respective chief executives, Peter
Reedy and Sandip Ranchod.
The rail portfolio has come into stark relief in recent months with the
spike in oil prices, just as it did in the 1970s.
Rail freight and passenger rail proves its worth when there is a
price crunch.
In financial terms, Kiwi Rail is on track to deliver its
160 million earnings target this financial year by June 30,
2026. That is up from last year when it exceeded its
110 million earnings target.
Interislander reliability is at 98%,
Air NZ must look on with envy of that result.
Of note, in 2021, it was 81% reliable, then
83%
reliable in 2022, and has picked up steadily since then.
This is due to a substantial increase in maintenance investment and great work by
crews and management. Likewise, rail freight service
reliability is up too. That matters because turning up on
time is what matters in freight. That is why rail freight volumes are
up 7% this year versus road freight increasing by
2%. You're witnessing market share shifting to rail.
We want to put on record our thanks to Ms.
Tindall, her board, and the whole team at Kiwi Rail because we are
seeing a firm, disciplined focus on performance.
Railway workers will look back on this period in their history as the turning point
for long-term success.
Regarding the ferries, our thanks are also given to Mr.
McKenzie, his board, and the whole team at Ferry Holdings.
In July, we will announce the details of a long-term
commercial set of arrangements,
sensible, affordable port fees.
The ferry operator,
the secure future for freighters and families on the Cook Strait, all
for 2.3 billion less than the ridiculous
IRX program. This is a project that all parliamentarians should
learn from. Some in this committee have designs on the transport portfolio in their
futures.
You would do well to study what it looks like to drive performance based on scope
control, to drop the magpie attraction to shiny designs,
and appoint competent men and women to deliver only what is needed to do the job.
Take city rail link, for example. When the government in 2021, when IRX was
approved, tried to do everything, everywhere, all at once with many different
infrastructure projects. It placed huge demand on the small construction sector,
and prices then shot up. The blowout there was an inside job.
Instead, we need to have an agreed infrastructure pipeline, spend
more than 60 cents on every dollar on maintenance and renewal,
and sequence major projects in a steady manner that drives supply through
stable demand.
That is what we are doing in rail already.
Some politicians have ambitions for sainthood when they just need to attend
confession.
The good news is we are providing a lesson in good management with rail.
We welcome any questions. Thank you.
Thank you. Right. First question, Julie Anne Genter, then
Kerry.
Is design work still being undertaken on the ferry project,
or is that concluded?
Which ferry is she talking about?
The Interislander ferries that you just referred to.
New ferries.
Well, the new ferries, the new ferry design
work is continuing. Yeah.
So if the design work's still underway and there's not a fixed price or
capped contract, how can the government be confident
about the delivery price and timing?
Or is there a fixed price?
We have a fixed price contract with the shipyard.
With the shipyard, but what about the rest of the work?
So-
You're talking about the wharves and-
Yeah
... and so forth?
Landside.
We are going through contracts at the moment.
Okay.
And we have identified areas where we
will provide the product that is required to
berth the ferries
and the equipment that goes with it, all within the 1.7.
So there won't be any costs that needs to be
met by
the regional council or the port owners?
Yes. No.
The regional council will not be up for anything more.
Yeah, but there are some costs that they're meeting-
Yes
... that will be laid out there. Yeah.
Okay. So in-
Every question you're asking here has been put out in press statements and answered
to you before.
Sure.
The only one there is the July announcement.
Well, I guess I'm just trying to-
There's only fact that's new
... be assured that the full cost of the
project is comparable to what was happening before in terms of
what the government share is versus overall costs.
No, because excuse me, I don't want anything like what was happening before.
What was happening before had blowouts so that the price of the ferries was
actually, in the end, could have been less than 20% of the total cost.
Yeah.
Over 80% would've been on infrastructure that no one knew about.
Right. So-
I hope we're not going to do that.
I'm just wondering if there's still just-
By the way, have you studied Tasmania and see what they did?
They did exactly what the IRX program did. They got the two ferries all right.
No infrastructure. Now they can't even use the ferries.
That's where we were heading, and I'm never going to back off on that
So there's a fixed price for the vessels, for the ships-
Yes
... but not for the work on the wharves?
Contracts haven't been let yet.
So we don't know the total cost of the project yet?
The board has made it very clear to Sandip and his team-
Yeah
... we are not going a dollar over 1.7 billion.
And so we will look at the ways that we can achieve that.
We've achieved some, for example, in Picton, and I told you last time we were here,
where originally we were going to transition Bluebridge and Interislander across.
We don't have to do that anymore. We had a smart infrastructure
person who came in and described a way that we could do it.
It saves us time, and it saves us money.
And we are continuing to do that.
In November 2025, ministers announced that
suggested user charges would be sufficient to repay Crown funding and
provide for future ferry replacement.
Is that still the Crown's position?
Say that again. Say that again.
The minister's announcements in November 2025
suggested that user charges would be sufficient to repay
Crown funding and provide for ferry replacement in the future.
Well, if there was a change, we'd have announced it.
We haven't changed our announcement back in November '25.
That's the position still.
Okay.
That's how you run government. You keep your word, unless circumstances
dramatically change where you have to point out the difference.
We have not made that difference or seen that difference-
Just one more final-
Last, last one then we've got to get to Sup next.
Yeah, yeah, yeah. So
how has-
No, I'm trying to get, I'm trying to get to the point of your question.
Yeah
An announcement is made. If the circumstances had changed, we'd announce the
change.
Has the conflict in Iran and higher fuel prices
affected project costings?
Not at this point. No.
Not at this point.
Okay. Dave Sup.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. My question is for Peter,
CEO of Kiwi Rail.
The minister said last year that the cost of
the ferries will be
offset by the Interislander paying
the port fees.
Just wondering if that's still the case, and if so, how
Kiwi Rail is able to fund that, and if not,
how will Kiwi Rail fund that?
We're still in negotiation with Ferry Holdings on the overall
commercial agreements.
And we are collaborating
extremely well with Ferry Holdings and the ports.
So the whole package of how this looks is still work in
progress.
Okay, so no indication of
likely
how it will affect Kiwi Rail's balance sheet as yet?
Well,
the work we're doing is we understand our demand model going forward.
Okay.
And we've made that, and we've shared that with Sandip and the team.
So we're very aligned around the demand, we're very aligned around the
affordability of what we need to run the operation, and
as the operator that's our job. And Ferry Holdings are doing a great job at
taking that information and working with all of us on what would fees
be, for example, for terminal fees.
Okay. Thank you.
Thanks.
Thank you.
Yes, thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you, Minister and team.
Can I just go back to the fact that final contracts haven't necessarily been
let for the full project?
What protections are in place to manage delay in
terms of delivery,
contract failure, cost overruns, those sorts of things?
So I hear that you say the board has been very clear, not a dollar more than this
figure. But what is actually going to be put in place to
mitigate cost overruns, failure to deliver?
Well, one could give a thousand answers from
this position right here, but the main answer is we're not putting up with cost
plus anymore.
Mm-hmm.
We've gone through four decades of cost plus.
Total rip-offs like
Transmission Gully,
CityRail link in Auckland, $2 billion overspend.
I mean, we're not putting up with any of that anymore.
And out there, it's clear in the market that the government's view
on this level of future performance has changed dramatically.
We expect them to do contracts and be completed on time
and within budget. And the last time that happened was the second Tauranga Harbor
Bridge.
So-
And guess who organized that?
So what is specifically being put as part of the
contractual negotiations to ensure that, as
the minister has said, that that is not going to happen?
It's all good and well saying, "The board's made it very clear, not a dollar more."
But what is actually being done to ensure that actually that is the outcome?
From a board point of view, we have made it very clear to Sandip and his
crew in negotiations
we will not be going over our budget.
Sandip's probably better to answer because he's in the middle of doing the
negotiations and so forth at the moment.
Yeah, sure. Designs have been developed.
They've been priced by builders who we have at the table now on each port.
Those prices have been submitted to us.
They find their way into a contract, and target prices get used with an
incentive pain-gain regime to manage the cost.
On top of that, we work collaboratively with the ports to
monitor construction.
Those rules of racing have been written up.
The builders understand them, and we get started on those when they hit the
ground, which has started now.
So part of the issue as to why the negotiations for the existing
closure took so long after Nicola Willis decided to cancel the project
without any alternative in place was the need for a
cancellation component. Are there cancellation
components being entertained as part of these contractual negotiations?
So we're using standard form contracts, and they have those sorts of exit
provisions in them.
Okay.
Can I just say, we
have also announced that we've got hundreds of millions in contingency factored
into our planning on this matter. And the other thing that's
most critical is
cost plus is not really going to be written into the contract.
No.
That's the fundamental difference. It's not going to be in the contract.
Minister, what assurances can you give that the new ferries will
be delivered and in service
by the timeframe that you've set of 2029?
And who ultimately will be held accountable if that
timeframe is not met?
Well,
the-
You?
Yes, I will be.
I probably will still be here to oversee that they get it done properly.
But the Chinese have given me to know that,
believe without it becoming a contractual matter,
that they're out to deliver earlier than they've committed themselves
to.
Having been there to looked at their operation
and how big it is and how enthusiastic they were for
potential future contracts with New Zealand, that they'll
go gangbusters to do what they said they can do.
So are you then saying that the
full package for the ferries could potentially
be delivered
earlier?
Yes.
Port infrastructure, everything.
Well, that's the other thing. I mean, why not?
The reality is, if I can just give you an example.
There was a fire at Wellington Airport, right?
The planning to fix this looks like it's going to be months away.
I was looking at it the other day. There's no 24/7 working.
This is your capital city airport, and look at the laxity and approach they take.
That's got to be expunged from New Zealand's business from here on in, government
or private business. We've got to get back on track as a country.
We're going to have to start working our a*s and doing the job and fulfilling
contracts in the way that other first world countries do.
We used to do it when we had nobody but a horse and cart in the good old days
under Burgoyne, when he built more railways in 10 years than the next 130
years. So it's a matter of bad attitude and governance, really.
In terms of the fact that... Just one more.
One more.
Thank you. Currently, there is no rail-enabled capacity
out of the existing fleet at the moment that's operating
the strait.
So
in terms of risk to national
supply chain opportunities through rail,
what has actually been put in place to mitigate some of that as
a concern?
It might be for Mr. Reid perhaps.
Sure. I'll take that. So firstly,
we were in consultation with the market in December last year,
looking at the options
and would the market pay for another ship.
The market, and when I say our market, I mean our customers, made it quite clear,
no, they wouldn't be prepared to do that, but they wanted to look at options should
a ferry go down,
or if Bluebridge's ferry went down as well.
So we went
to the market, and from a business continuity perspective, we've put in
place if a ferry goes down while the
Kaitaki is in dry dock for three months.
So this is during sort of July, August, September.
If a ferry goes down, then we've got a coastal solution,
which is slower freight, but the customers have said,
"We would allocate the right sort of freight to go on coastal."
We've been to the market.
They accept that.
That's happened in previous times when our critical infrastructure has been out,
like the Kokura earthquake.
Now, if, for example, there was a catastrophic
disaster where a ferry was out for several months, then we'd obviously look at
other options as well. And we've done this in the past when we
bought the Valentine out. But at the moment,
contingency is for a coastal feed,
and we've already got rates in place, and we've already communicated those to the
market.
Is there a concern-
Hang on, so that's the last one.
Sorry. Yeah. Actually, I'll have a question for you later.
Okay. I'm going to take a quick sup on that one if I can, because we're doing
the ports inquiry, and the issue of coastal shipping has actually come up quite a
lot. The relationship you have there that you're talking about as a contingency is
with the coastal shippers, or is it with
the international shippers?
It's SWAT.
SWAT. Okay. So that's important for us to know.
Yeah.
How important is that to you?
Oh, critical. I mean, it's part of the transport system.
Okay. That's helpful. Thank you. Dan.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Question for Chris, just in relation to the
infrastructure
for Wellington and for Picton. This government's got a big focus on
value for money, so I'm just wondering if
your organization is focused on using
cost benefit analysis or
more specifically, the Treasury better business case
methodology in developing the port infrastructure,
and in deciding the exact infrastructure requirements for those two ports.
Again, Sandra will give you the detail, but
from a board perspective, we started out with
what is the ship dimensions.
What is then required at the two ports to enable our ships to berth.
That meant in Picton basically
destroying, if you like, good Ministry of Works
structures that were still very good from 1961.
And if we hadn't changed the dimensions of the ship, we could have used those
pieces of infrastructure still. Undersolds and so forth, we have to
go from 19 to 28.5 meters.
So we couldn't use it. In Wellington, we had a
maximum reuse,
and the maximum reuse has been put in place for everything apart
from the
link spans because the new vessels are a different
dimension
So
in some ways, we started at a disadvantage in
that we had a project which has just dropped on us, two ships and
two ports.
Mm-hmm.
So we didn't do a lot of that planning and business case
work. And so through Sandip and his team,
we have identified what are the options that we have, and we have been working
with Treasury.
Yep.
And the options that we have come up with that Sandip was talking about going
through with contractors, that has delivered for
us a set of plans which
now in the contract negotiations, both with KiwiRail
as the current operator and the two ports,
is going to deliver us what is required-
This one
... at the minimum cost.
Yeah.
Because that's one of the things that we're required for,
minimum cost and on time for the end of 2028.
Mm-hmm.
So
business cases and so forth sort of missed out
because of the project, the way it started, and our delivery
time.
Great. Thank you.
I'm going to take two more sups on this. You had a new area, didn't you, Julie Ann?
Yeah, I have.
So I'm going to take a sup and a sup, and then I'm going to have a primary to Julie
Ann.
Because you just now-
There we go.
Thank you, Minister. Just now you mentioned about you're negotiating with the
contractor for this
construction project or the rebuild for the port.
But as my understanding, there's a few project only got
one bidder to actually bid for the project. Do you think it's a concern?
Do you think because without any competition, the cost of doing
the project will be higher?
Is that a concern for you?
Yeah. Sandip.
Yeah. So there were processes
to select the bidders for the construction.
They were run by our delivery partners, who are the ports, and we sat next to them
through that process. In Picton, there was a competitive process that
selected a contractor to enter into a pricing phase,
and Hy- Hyvinchi won that.
And in Bryan Perry being selected by Wellington, that
went through a process as well. They're known to those companies.
The additional measure that we've put on to mitigate the risk that
you're talking about-
Mm
... is
reconciliation of price to prove value for money.
So we have independent estimates look over those construction estimates and have
to reconcile those estimates as the design packages come through.
Thank you.
Can I just check the ownership? And I don't think the ownership's changed of the
port infrastructure from what was proposed before to now.
The Port of Marlborough was and is owned by
Port of Marlborough, the improvements there.
In Wellington, KiwiRail owns the, or the Interisland Line owns
that bit of the port, from my recollection.
And
so is that infrastructure going to be owned by
KiwiRail/Interisland Line,
or is it going to be owned by Centreport?
As far as infrastructure is concerned, leaving the ships
aside, the Crown will own the link spans and the
associated maritime
pieces that go with that.
At both ends or just the Wellington end?
At both ends.
At both ends. Okay, Bryan.
Marlborough District Council, through their holdings, owns
Port in Picton.
Yep.
And they have
recently agreed to contribute 110.
Yep.
What that has meant in Picton, and it's been made public previously,
is that there will be a vehicle put together which will
be a mix of Crown and Port, and they will
own the infrastructure
as a proportion. So in Picton, it's roughly 70 to
30,
but the board that runs that special purpose vehicle will be
50/50. The port operates the port, but the Crown
will always retain ownership of the assets that we have paid
for.
70 or 30?
At Centreport, it's slightly different in that we're not building a new
wharf.
Yeah.
So the Crown and Wellington will own the link span and
associated works that go with it.
Land is a different issue because land is owned by the port over in
Picton. In Wellington, there's a mixture of
KiwiRail and port land that they work across.
No, that's helpful. And I wanted to go to a completely different area, and that is
the opportunities for the rail network
for new links which you've been working on.
Obviously, we know about the Marsden link, but I know that there are others which
KiwiRail have significant aspirations for.
So I'm just interested in what you are seeing as the opportunities
to expand the network or to expand services, whether that is
freight or passenger, across the network.
To Cameron.
Sure. I'll take that.
So firstly, from a metro perspective, you've obviously,
post CRL-
Yep
... there's an opportunity there to expand more
capacity through that line. The idea would be to have a
separation of freight and metro, like you do in large modern
cities. And as the patronage forecasts are getting up to 50 million
passengers per annum, then that will be a requirement.
So firstly,
a fourth main is critical. So as you come up to Papakura, should go left and
right and separate that out. That would allow freight train
access in and out of Auckland, and there's 50 trains a day right now
in and out of Auckland in terms of freight.
So the national freight supply market starts at Auckland and it
ends in Auckland.
And you have to leave at a certain time from Auckland to connect with the Cook
Strait ferries. So firstly, on a freight perspective, it's the Golden Triangle.
If we could electrify the Golden Triangle and there's passing loops there, so
50% of the freight growth going forward,
in particular commodities, is going to be in the Golden Triangle.
So there's some capacity opportunities there.
S-
Thirdly, in Metro there's a large opportunity
from an urban development perspective to look at
the east of Auckland around Mount Roskill, and that involves the Avondale
Southdown corridor, which if that was opened up, that is an urban
development Metro opportunity, and it obviously
benefits freight as well.
The other opportunity is selected freight hubs, intermodal freight hubs.
We're looking at one now in Mosgiel, and that allows
consolidation of freight into a central area.
So there's selectively
key parts of our freight network in terms of putting in passing loops to get more
capacity.
We're working on right now the investment we're getting from the government that's
going to help us speed the trains up in terms of reducing speed restrictions.
So getting more out of our existing network as opposed to building a
lot of new rail networks. But the big growth, particularly in Auckland, would
be thinking about how we can separate the metro and freight.
Okay. So Avondale Southdown is critical-
Yes
... for that.
Yes.
And so the council and the discussions with the council, I understand there have
been some discussions with the council, how we try to encourage them
through focus intensification in that area to help pay for the
infrastructure as opposed to going somewhere else.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. There have been some initial discussions at official
level. So Peter and I, with the CEO of Auckland Council, Minister Peters
has met with Mayor Brown. They are encouraging us to
work together. To answer your question, and obviously disclosure, I was
the CFO of Auckland Council-
So I understand
... some years ago.
So this is very much in my wheelhouse.
The Avondale Southdown urban development case would
unlock approximately 13,000 new homes.
That is 13,000 new ratable units for Auckland
Council as well, as well as other commercial activity around that
corridor. The important piece also is that designation is in
place until 2030. So we are, Peter and
I, again working with the officials at Auckland Council to give effect to
that designation.
Excellent. No, thank you.
Julian.
Will the government be funding an upgrade to the signaling system in
Wellington? We had a train derail
because there's long overdue, the upgrade was needed years
ago, but it needs government funding, and clearly passenger rail in
Wellington is
a really important part of our network. We have high levels of patronage.
Mr-
Look, I'll let my colleagues answer that question, but
contemplating $750 million to
make up for human error is not, in my view, a
smart economic strategy, nor is it a smart governmental or business
strategy either. What we need to do is ensure that the people who are doing the
job do their job properly. So we train them to the max and make sure that they're
alert and making sure that they're capable of doing what they're
expected to. Because even in the upgrade in Auckland, still saw
what you might call four examples of the red lights being run
in recent times.
So are you saying that you don't think we need to upgrade the
signaling system?
I thought it was like over $1 billion you're talking about.
I'm just ask-- like, do you think that we don't-- we-- that's a nice to have,
that we don't need to upgrade our signaling system to be consistent with other
passenger rail networks?
If we had the money, we'd do a whole lot of other things as well.
But the question is, is it vitally necessary to get the performance that
one wants?
So how many train derailments do you think we should accept?
Well, it wasn't actually a train derailment, was it?
That's the first thing that's wrong about that statement.
Can we just clarify?
I can probably pick that up. So officially,
there has been over the last three years, it's been
back in '24, 110 million, '25,
144 million, last year, this year's budget, 106 million to the two
metros.
You've seen significant improvement in the
Auckland Metro. Wellington, there's lots of work being done on the
Wairarapa
network, so investment is going in.
Just on the Johnson--
well, the Kendalla incident, so MetLink and Transdev have
publicly said that that train passed a red signal. That's the first thing.
It's under investigation, so I won't go into any other further discussion on that.
The second thing is the key point is the signal
system worked safely. It failed safely.
So the signaling system in Wellington is safe.
Hmm.
Whenever you go-- if you go through a red light, and we don't operate the
trains in Wellington, but when the operators do, all the signals go to red,
so it fails safely. The particular incident
in Kendalla, it failed safely. And not only that,
the signaling system diverted the train onto a separate rail
spur that we had designed through government funding a year ago.
So,
we are continually investing the money in signaling systems both
in Wellington and Auckland. In fact, in Auckland right now,
there's a lot of work going on in the southern area to post
CRL. So it's a big part of the investment of we get from
government in the, is in the signaling area.
Thank you. We are at time, but really appreciate it.
Thank you for all the answers to questions.
If there's any final thing you wanted to say, otherwise, we'll call it there.
Well,
government can be boring, but actually dealing with railways, which is got--
it's been a rather Cinderella rise from marginalized-
Yes
... parts of our history. It's actually quite exciting.
So I advise any of you, if you have aspirations for this job, one of the best
portfolios you can have. You're actually doing something progressive that'll be
around 50, 60, 100 years from now
Indeed.
Thank you all very much, really appreciate it.
Thank you.
Thanks.
That's good.
Sweating here.
Thanks, Stephen.
Sorry.
It's a missile
We better get the next minister.
Long story short.
It was a conference last year.
Oh, really?
It was budgeted, travel was budgeted at $30,000, it cost
$60,000. There was a mistake with they budgeted
economy flights. It was a 20 hours flight, so they upgraded
to business class, and then under budgeted land transport.
So long story short,
it was a budgetary error in assistance, and everything else
was within the guidelines.
Great.
I'm going. I wouldn't even submit the question.
Sorry. Simon. Simon. You got in. You cut it
fine.
Hurry.
Right.
No worries.
Welcome.
Hello again. Nice to see you.
Long time no see.
Good to be here. Yeah.
Right. So I think what we've got, we've got you here
for the first 45, and then James for the second 45.
Is that the way we're going to do it or we-
No, I think-
Do you want to tag team?
Yeah.
How do you want to do it?
Well, you've only got me for half.
Sorry?
You've only got me for half an hour.
Oh, God.
James Meagher for half an hour is all, not for a full-
Right. Okay. For half an hour at the... Okay.
Cool. Good.
That's fine. But that's the way we're doing it, one after the other.
Okay, cool.
Right. Okay. In the usual form, great to have you here.
If you want to make any opening statements, we always look forward to that.
And you know there's going to be plenty of questions, so we look forward to ripping
into that.
I can't wait.
Well, thanks for having me. Good to see you all again.
I've got Honorable James Meagher as my associate here.
He deals with range of delegated matters.
Obviously, he's got Brad Ward here, chief executive of, or acting executive of
Ministry of Transport prior to MCERT.
Brett Flynn here from the Transport Agency, MR-
Actually, do you want to come up to the table, Brett, as well?
And anybody else who want to-
It's getting ahead of like, but okay.
Then a range of senior officials here from across the agencies.
Busy times in transport, is a massive work program, as you can
see, both at a policy level led by MoT and at a
delivery level through NZTA,
and other agencies as well. Any number of
different things we could talk about, but
probably just a couple to highlight.
One is
the move towards
RUC reform,
move towards electronic road user charges, and
a transition that frankly has to happen, as the
National Transport Fund revenue becomes increasingly unsustainable because of
electric vehicles and fuel efficient cars.
Which is a good thing, but does put a revenue
pressure on the system.
So we obviously got work underway around that.
The Land Transport Revenue Bill, which has just come back to the House, thank you
for the committee's hard work on that,
is the sort of first step in that transition.
We're not rushing it. It's important to get it right, build social license.
I would hope we could do it in a collegial and relatively
bipartisan way. It will be one of the biggest
reforms to the transport funding system, probably since
in a generation, or possibly even two, depending on how you measure it.
So really important we get that right.
A number of other things that pop to mind.
Obviously, you've seen the National Infrastructure Plan
response, and
government's committed to a review of land transport funding, which is a separate
issue to the,
separate but connected issue to RUC and eRUC,
and we're continuing to get on with that.
But as I said to the committee a couple of days ago, we haven't decided on the
scope or
exactly how that will work, but we've just committed to it as part of the
infrastructure plan response. Anyway, conscious I don't want to talk forever, and
you'll have questions, so happy to just get into it.
Start off with Tangi.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you, ministers.
When can we expect the draft
GPS for land transport to come out?
Well, that's a good question. We don't have a fixed date for it.
This is for the 2027
period onwards, 1 July.
It
is challenging because
obviously we've been dealing with the fuel
situation in the last
few weeks and months,
and
that has discombobulated things somewhat.
So there's a challenge there.
And
the most... I mean, the obvious issue that I think the committee is well
aware of is the scheduled rise in FED and RUC, fuel excise
duty and road user charges scheduled on the 1st of January
2027,
which have to be legislated, and of course, haven't been legislated yet, and we've
signaled are unlikely to go ahead.
So that factors into it as well. So I don't have a fixed date.
Once we... We don't actually have to
issue one.
There's no pressing time pressure on it, put it that way.
Right.
But, I mean, well, there's no pressing time pressure, but obviously we need one
both consulted and finalized, in advance of 1 July '27.
Right. So it is possible that it won't come out before end of calendar
year?
It's possible. I'm not going to get ahead.
It's a moveable feast at the moment in terms of fuel price and
pressure on the system and range of other things going on, so I'm not going to get
ahead of that. It's possible, but also
another
path is possible too.
Options.
You've just said that in terms of the proposed increase
around FED, that you're unlikely to go ahead with that.
Yeah.
So you're not
ruling that out
as a definite?
No. The status quo is just what I said, which is it's unlikely,
but
possible.
But still possible.
Well, if you think just in the last few days, the world has changed
again. We hope.
Obviously there's been a deal
done
in the Middle East.
We've got to wait and see how that plays out, but the fuel price is down compared
to a month ago, for example.
And this is part of the issue, right?
Is we need to wait and see where that lands and it may lead to more
sustainable,
a lower oil price over time.
It also may not. We just don't know, and we want to take
advice on that. And
it's pretty obvious, right? And we've publicly sort of signaled this, when
petrol at the levels it's been at in the last few months at various points,
at a time of
difficulty for many New Zealanders.
And we don't have to get into the politics of why that is.
You know my views on that.
It's just a hard ask for people to
stump up with a 12 cent rise in petrol tax, and the
equivalent in RUC. On the other hand,
I'm acutely conscious, as I know you will be and the committee will be as well,
because you've investigated those issues.
The land transport funding system is not sustainable the way it is at the
moment, and the system is meant to be user pays.
It isn't.
It hasn't been for years.
Governments of both flavors have created that problem.
And
in the medium to long term, we have to get back to some level of fiscal
sustainability around this.
And petrol tax hasn't risen since 2020.
In real terms, it's fallen by 21, I think. 21, Paul, is that right?
Sure.
Yeah, I think I'm right, and so we can get you the number, but in real terms, it's
fallen by about 20, 21% from memory.
So, for every dollar in the system, you're getting less bang for buck.
And again, I've publicly said this before, there are good reasons
why petrol tax hasn't gone up, but
it's a user paid system, and it isn't at the moment.
So, obviously-
Last couple.
Yeah, sure. Last ones.
You've indicated that FED is important in
terms of GPS priorities. It's a funding option or part of
anyhow. You must have some indication of the direction
of travel for the incoming GPS. Is it likely
that it would be a continuation of the kind of priorities
that sits in the current GPS? Or,
in spite of, well, given the comments that you've just made,
can we anticipate perhaps a
change in direction in some aspects and what that might look like?
Well, I'm not going to get ahead of where we get to as a cabinet on that.
I'll just make this point. One of the things that
the transport sector, infrastructure sector more broadly, has often said
to me, as I'm sure they've said to you and to Kieran and Julieanne as well, is that
the three-year wild oscillations in GPSs
are unhelpful. Local government makes the same point, by the way,
because they have to operate within the GPS and
obviously the National Land Transport Fund revenue goes out through the co-fund to
them. And the quite often quite big
oscillations in GPS priorities and strategic direction
are really unhelpful for long-term planning.
And of course, that drives up cost and delays projects.
And so
having a degree of stability over time
is important, and there's a couple of ways to achieve that.
One is,
you obviously change each one, but having a degree of stability within the
GPS is important. And then the second way to do that is having a longer-term
horizon for the GPS.
So they're on a three-year basis.
We've publicly talked before about a 10-year thing.
There's a
difficulty there with the way the budget process works and
just the Crown forecasting and fiscals.
So that's a subsidiary issue, but related.
So I would envisage some change
to the next draft GPS that we consult on,
but it's not going to be a
wild change because, as I said, indicated I think that
the sector and local government prefers a degree of stability
rather than wild changes.
Don't you, Laura?
No.
Okay. I'll take yours up, Julie,
and then I'll take a sup on this, and I've got one, two, three at the moment,
primaries.
In the national infrastructure plan, they suggested
about 60 cents on the dollar being spent on maintenance and
renewals.
Yeah.
That it would have to be a change that would be reflected in the activity classes
and the GPS, to ensure that
there's more funding going into maintenance and renewals-
Yeah
... than new projects. Is that something that we might-
... expect in the new GPS?
So that's something we're conscious of and something we've been
thinking about. And if you sort of think about it on a kind of first best basis,
right?
What's the first call on money that goes into the system?
Well, looking after properly and maintaining what you've got.
Anyone who runs a sort of network utility would tell you that.
And that's historically what we haven't done a particularly good job of in New
Zealand across not just transport, across multiple
sectors. And so
first best would be dollar goes in, look after what you've got, maintain
it properly, because that's the best bang for buck you get for the money.
I might ask Brett just to talk a bit about some of the real
savings they've been able to achieve through the latest long-term
maintenance contracts, maintenance and ops contracts on the network,
where we are at NZTA is achieving quite a lot of savings.
And there has been a big investment in the last GPS period
in-- it's called the pothole repair fund or whatever it is, but
it's essentially maintenance and ops.
Yeah.
So there has been a big increase through the last GPS period
into that, and we are achieving quite a lot and making some quite big
gains through technology. What's the name of that thing that
goes out and around and measures the road network?
Yeah, the Nitro truck. Yeah.
The Nitro truck. There you go. I might ask Brett just briefly comment on that.
Yeah. So we've done a couple of things in the maintenance space.
We've just gone through a re-tender of all of our contracts across the
maintenance sector.
And we've completely changed the model from what was a network outcomes contract,
which basically said, "These are the outcomes we want to achieve.
We pay you a lump sum, and you go away and achieve it." That's proven over time not
to deliver value for us. We've gone now to a much more direct
contracting model, where we pay for what they do.
We brought asset management more back into NZTA, and we're going to be a
lot more directive with them. The other thing we've done is we've sharpened
it up commercially and made quite a bit of the work contestable into the
future. So while we have long-term, 10-year contracts for each region,
we've made 20% of that contestable every year for
smaller contractors and other players to
bid the work. If the incumbent contractor is not performing, they don't get to
bid the work. So we've strengthened that up.
We have seen significant savings at the tender box.
The other part the minister touches on is the
data collection. Can't be good asset management without good data, and
we've had a truck that runs around New Zealand for a number of years that comes
to New Zealand from Australia, and it runs our network once every three years.
It takes three years to run it. We have now purchased that truck, brought it into
New Zealand. We have it here based permanently, so we're collecting scrim,
roughness, rutting data annually across the network, which is giving us a
much better picture of condition of the state highway network and where we need to
invest, and be much sharper around our investment.
Supplementary.
Thank you. I appreciate what you mean, Minister, about the stability afforded by a
GPS with a longer horizon.
But how would you figure that into
differences in ideological direction?
For instance, National campaigned on changing the
road
speed limits,
and
we're still yet to see what the impact of that might be
quantified in terms of social costs,
deaths, injuries, and things like that.
How would a longer term GPS kind of
hold a change in government
to those kind of ideological shifts? How do you justify that?
Well, I think you're conflating two different concepts there.
One is,
it's a different point of view around speed.
But I wouldn't overstate the differences, to be honest.
There have been some changes on the margins.
You wouldn't want that sort of thing written into a GPS.
Well, there's a separate issue to the GPS.
The GPS is more about the activity, as Julie-Anne says, it's more about the
activity classes, the strategic priorities for the network.
Those priorities, though.
Yeah, sure, at a high level.
They might turn out not to be very good priorities.
I think you're conflating two separate issues.
They're obviously related on one level.
Obviously, at the end of the day, it's a political process.
Parties are free to campaign on whatever they like.
A couple of days ago, you weren't here, but a couple of days ago, we were having a
conversation on this committee around
the National Infrastructure Plan and one of the sub-themes in that plan, which the
commission don't say, but I can say, I think, is that we've all just got
to be better at stopping
campaigning on policies that we don't have any idea how much will cost.
And
both sides of politics have been guilty of
that. And we could have a political bun fight about who's more guilty
of it and all the rest of it. Frankly, that's a bit unhelpful.
I am really focused on fixing the system so that we
avoid that. And
one of the ways we can do that is by endorsing the National Infrastructure Plan,
which I'm really pleased to see has now basically been endorsed by every party in
Parliament.
And if we get the system settings right, we
will avoid doing that. But at the end of the day, politicians are always
free to say whatever they like and campaign on particular things.
Then it's incumbent on the ones that are in to implement it, and people will be
able to account for that. So
I'm not naive about the idea that you could ever remove the politics out of
transport, but we can be better than what we have at the moment.
Because this three-year backwards and forwards
oscillation, you canceled this, you canceled that,
this is an overrun, this is that.
Everyone's sick of it. I'm sick of it. The sector's sick of it.
The public, frankly, is sick of it, and I'm trying to make the system better.
And
I invite you to join me on that journey.
I'm going to take up a sub because as Minister of
Infrastructure, you obviously were here a couple of days ago.
And I did ask about whether the GPS as a tool is actually
fit for purpose. It's not been one that we've had forever.
And I did observe when Steven Joyce introduced it that you
would get exactly this oscillation.
Actually, one of the members of this committee did say, well, what's it going to
look like if she was Minister of Transport?
And that's the oscillation we've had. So is that model one that is fit for purpose?
Well, that's-
Or is it one we should-
It's a good question.
Sorry. Can I just finish one other part of that?
Sorry.
Which is just the other bit is that if we're going to go for 60% of-
Of asset renewals. It's one of the things you've talked about legislating for
government agencies. If that were legislated into the GPS
or whatever successor to the GPS there was, wouldn't that at least
confine the area of oscillation?
Yeah. Let me take that in reverse order.
We haven't talked about legislating for 60% figure because that's just a
rough guide. Don't get fixated on 60%.
Yeah. I agree.
That's just a rough guide. What we've talked about legislating is long-term asset
management plans-
Yes
... that will be a requirement of government agencies.
And as Brett says, to do that, you need the data, you need the asset registers.
NZTA has a good understanding, and particularly in the last couple of years,
are much better, for the reasons Brett says, understanding of the data
that they have and the state of the network.
Work to do there, but improving. Other government agencies
have a, I would argue, insufficient understanding,
and that's partly why we're going to make the asset management plans compulsory
through law rather than just through a Cabinet Office circular that frankly you
guys probably have never heard of.
So
don't get fixated on the 60% figure, but yes, that will apply to NZTA once we
legislate,
which will be next year. To your first issue,
if you think about the
modern GPS construct,
it is a legacy of
the 2008 reforms through Annette King,
which replaced Transit, Transfund and the LTSA.
So NZTA is an amalgam of... Well, it's not anymore, but-
Mm
... it's essentially an amalgam of three separate streams of activity.
And
at the end of the day, transport is a network.
Fundamentally, running the state highways is a network utility and
the commission makes this point in the national infrastructure plan.
It's run quite separately to other network utilities like
electricity wires, for example, water infrastructure,
or transmission.
And there's a high degree of political
overlay through it, through the GPS,
as well around pricing.
And so those are some of the issues we're going to ventilate and unpick a little
bit through the review.
So we've even started that work, so I'm just kind of signaling some of the things
that are kind of-
It's good it's being thought about
... oscillating around in my head.
Yeah. No, good. Okay. Now, Julian, was that a primary you've got?
Yeah. I just want to do a quick-
So what I'll do is, because I did have one, two and three, so I'm not going to do
that. I'm going to go one, two,
then I'm going to bounce them to three, four, five. Yeah, we'll do it that way.
Okay. Away you go, Dan.
Thank you, Minister.
Yeah.
One of the decision you make on budget 2026 is the
investment $1.7 billion for extending the
Waikato Expressway. When there's so many project need to be built or need
to be start, what is the reason behind that you choose to start this
project or decide to invest in this project?
Yeah. So Cambridge to Pirori has
been kicking around for a long time.
It's a dangerous section of road. It's a really important freight corridor in the
Golden Triangle.
It's very unsafe. Well, not as safe as it could be, put it that way.
And
NZTA's been working away on it across multiple governments for some
time now. So it's kind of the next cab off the rank for funding in terms of large
roading projects.
And it was consented under
David Parker's fast track.
A lot of people think it was consented under our fast track. It wasn't.
But it was consented under the labor government fast track and
designated.
The property's been purchased, and is ready to go, so
early works later in the year.
Yep.
October, November.
Correct.
In procurement now.
Yep. Next stage.
In procurement now. There's two sections.
There's an online section, which is the existing road, which is basically road
widening and safety improvements, and then the offline section, which...
How long is the offline section?
The whole thing's 16, about eight and eight. About half and half.
About half and half. So you're doing two separate contracts?
Yeah. Two separate contracts.
Yeah. So one for the online bit, one for the offline bit.
And
yeah, we put a crown contribution in of 1.77 billion into that through the
budget allowance. It's obviously outside the NLTF,
and
final price to be determined after commercial procurement.
What is the economic benefit you will see with this project?
Oh, it's got a BCR of between 2.7 and 3.1.
3.1.
So it's got a good benefit cost
ratio.
Major improvements for freight productivity.
Obviously it's part of that Golden Triangle connecting Waikato to Bay of
Plenty and Tauranga and particularly the port,
and Auckland.
People on the committee might have different
views about the Waikato Expressway, but my view is it's been a real
boon for the Waikato region, connecting Auckland to
the economic hub of the city of the future and the
surrounds.
So
yeah, it's a good project. We're proud to fund that.
Yeah, because I can see that now, other than this one, you also got the Hawke's
Bay Expressway project have been working on, and also
starting the procurement for the Northland Expressways as well.
I
believe that most of these project are funded by the National
Land Transport Fund. If
1 to 2% of that funding being reduced or being allocated for other
project, how will that affect those road
building and transport infrastructure being built?
Yeah. So the Hawke's Bay Expressway is NLTF.
Oh, actually, is it road?
It's fully-
It's NLTF funded. Northland will be as
well. Commercial procurement around that at the moment obviously.
Waikato Expressway is Crown funded.
Otekaike to North Dunedin is Crown funded.
These projects are, as I'm sure you're aware, have a long history, quite a lot of
political argy-bargy over all of them.
There are trade-offs.
Transport is all about trade-offs actually.
As I've sort of indicated in my prior remarks, there's not enough money to go
around the system, so you have to make choices, and
yeah.
Juliane.
I wanted to ask about the additional funding
for operating public transport services with the higher diesel
costs.
Yep.
There's an undisclosed amount in the-
Yep
... budget for that.
Yeah.
In the previous budget, Budget 2025, the government cut 56
million in funding for public transport bus
decarbonization, which is essentially reducing
diesel use through electric vehicles or
zero emissions vehicles.
Is the government seeing any opportunity
to
assist councils to purchase more electric vehicles for public
transport services rather than simply paying more for diesel?
So in terms of the funding, so five and a half million has been appropriated
to support public transport operations for additional fuel costs in
'25/'6, that's the year we're in now.
We have set aside funding,
which is commercially sensitive, for
'26/'27. It's being held on a
contingency,
as you said, to help public transport authorities manage fuel-related cost
pressures. And I think that was a prudent thing to do.
But in the month since the budget, or the less than a month since the budget was
announced, the world has, as I say, hopefully, changed quite a
bit. So,
we may need that or we may not. It depends on the PTA, right?
So,
Nelson's in a great position. I think they're 100% electric
on bus networks.
Yes.
Palmerston North.
Yep.
Oh, Palmy as well. Oh, you're a lucky man, Tony.
Auckland's,
I forget the numbers. Auckland would be about 50/50. No.
No, about 30.
Thirty?
Yeah.
Yeah. Wellington, I don't know. So they vary it, but I don't have them to hand.
But I guess wouldn't it make sense, given the
financial pressure that councils are under, for the Crown to,
even if it isn't funding, even if it's a loan, enable
them to purchase zero emissions vehicles because there's so many different
benefits? It's
beneficial for the climate, it costs less money to run in the face of
higher oil prices-
Yeah
... and there's less pollution. Is the government going to look at assisting
councils because many of them don't have the balance sheet.
They're really constrained in funding relative to government.
So is there anything government can do-
Yeah, well, I mean-
... besides just paying more for diesel?
I think you're neatly highlighting the choices and trade-offs in public transport.
So yep, you can do that. Yep, you can do more
operating subsidies or, yep, you can expand the routes.
And at various different points, people argue for all three.
Both to buy new buses, buy new public transport infrastructure, buy new
kit,
give more money to people who take public transport,
in a
broad and untargeted way and-
Okay. This is not what my question-
Including-
Sorry. Can you just come back to my question, minister?
Including, by the way, on ferries that don't even operate.
Hang on.
Sorry, no, this is completely unrelated to my question.
Juliane, you-
Well, I'll make-
Let's get to the question
You just... No. It's a dismissive tactic-
Juliane
... for not answering the question.
Juliane. You could raise a point of order if you
want. Right. Can we have an answer, please? We don't interrupt in that way.
I'm making the point that there's any number of different things you could do
with public transport.
And the question is specifically, will the government find some way
to assist councils to purchase electric vehicles because it saves
operating costs, it reduces pollution?
We got the question. Beyond what's already happened, it's not in our work program.
Okay. So we're just going to pay more money for diesel rather than-
Well, that's-
... investing in long-term solutions
... well, that's your assertion.
As I've said publicly,
you've got primary, you're next.
Lots of people have
got lots of ideas about how to better support public transport.
I would argue the most effective thing we can do is
support public transport authorities to maintain what they've got through this
current situation we've got. And, if we need to,
there's potentially a role to target expansion of particular routes, but everyone's
got a bright idea.
Some are less bright than others.
Done that one? Dan.
Thanks, Mr. Chair.
Oh, yeah. Sorry, just on this. Brad's just reminded me.
The zero emissions public transport bus procurement mandate took force on the 1st
of July. The mandate requires zero emissions buses to be purchased
when new buses are acquired. So that was a previous government
mandate, I think, which we didn't change.
So the bus fleet will continue to decarbonize over time.
And there is, of course, support for public transport authorities.
There's billions of dollars going into the PTAs over a three-year period.
Minister, there's a allocation in the budget for ongoing fuel
response relief.
Yep.
I know that's technically not in your area, but part of that will be no doubt
consideration for public transport.
Yeah. The PT stuff, as I've just said, there's five and a half mil for fuel costs
in '25/'6.
There is an appropriation and a contingency beyond that, but it's commercially
sensitive.
Right.
But yeah.
Just curious to get a sense from you on
what you're thinking around support.
So are you considering, or have you considered broad-based
public You know, subsidies, if not,
what? What's the kind of approach that this government's taking in
terms of supporting those-
Yeah
... that are most affected by the crisis?
So the government already provides substantial subsidies for public transport.
It's a complicated funding picture in terms of when you jump on a bus, who pays?
I mean, you pay,
as a user.
The Public Transport Authority pays,
which means ratepayers pay.
Depending on who you are and what system you're in, the
Crown pays,
the National Transport Fund pays. It's a complicated funding picture.
And
additional support in a broad and untargeted way,
officials tell me is
not the most effective use of money,
can lead to quite perverse outcomes.
For example, where
very wealthy communities end up with very large
subsidies.
I would argue that's not necessarily the most effective use of cash, but that's for
others to judge.
Great. Thank you.
Thank you.
Yeah, thank you.
Some questions about RONJs.
Sure.
What is, at the moment, the current cost associated with
the suite of RONJs programs at this
point in time?
Well, the latest is,
these are forecasts, right? Is 56.
56 billion.
56 billion
over multiple years and subject to a range of assumptions, all of which are
worth testing, but they're expensive.
That figure's public.
Yeah. I guess, so the 56 billion figure has been
around for some time. There's not been any recent, I take the
assumptions point, but there hasn't been any recent assessment as to what
that potentially looks like?
No, because we tend to focus on it more at an individual
road level. And I've sort of said this before,
there's a spectrum of readiness. So,
Hawke's Bay's in construction now, Otaki about to go,
subject to commercial procurement decisions, about to hit go on
Northland. Obviously Cambridge to Pirori, which will be in
procurement, and so we'll have a final cost on that
by the end of the year, give or take.
Those are projects further up the food chain.
But then there's projects like the North West Coastal State Highway, for example,
which is designated. Well, how much is that road going to
cost? Well, who knows, really. We've got a
forecast, we've got an estimate,
but we don't know. And that's the point is that there's a
spectrum from in construction now through to
will be built at some point in the future, but it could be 20 years away, for
example.
So you've talked a wee bit previously about the need to reprioritize the
RONJs or resequence-
Yeah
... that. So firstly, how are you going to approach that and when can we expect
to see that resequencing information-
Yeah
... come through to the public domain?
Yeah, fair question. The answer is soon.
And
...
How quick is soon?
Well, I don't know. People have different definitions.
I'll just say soon.
It's a challenging piece of work.
Fuel crisis has not helped matters.
So,
soon, and
how are we going about approaching that?
The way NTTA is going about approaching that is kind of what I've just indicated,
which is there's a spectrum of readiness, benefit cost ratios flow into
that. As I think people perhaps are discovering a bit more
than they knew before,
you can't just build a road tomorrow.
There's an enormous amount of work that goes into all the pre-implementation work,
and the roads are at different stages of that as well.
And so,
that's part of it.
So when you say you'll release that information soon, can we
expect that the full suite of RONJs will all be
released in terms of resequencing that
information all at once? Or how is it actually
going to be-
My intention is to look at them in the round. So yes.
But also, and don't forget about this, it's not just about the RONJs.
There are significant public transport projects,
either planned or in construction, that we need to think about too.
So the Eastern Busway which is sort of, what, say 70% complete.
Yep. And just extended the last section.
So the last section's just been funded, which basically completes it, right?
Yep. Does, yep.
So there's that, and there's Northwest Rapid Transit in Auckland,
which is going through fast track consenting now, and stage one of Westgate Bus
Station's all but complete.
Yep. We're finishing.
So, that project's not, the rest of it's not funded, but we've sort of made a, in
fact the last government funded Westgate through the so-called shovel-ready
funding.
Six years later, we're finishing one station.
So that's part of it as well. Plus you've got the Airport to Botany Busway,
which is far less ready to go that other people have talked about.
You've got the Lower North Island trains, and I know
that our Christchurch colleague here will be interested in
Christchurch, for example, which is not currently part of the mix, but you've got
to think about public transport as part of that as well.
With the-
Sorry.
Can I, yeah.
You're done. Do you want me to start, Julia?
Just-
Oh, sorry
... one other one. And we touched on this a couple of days ago when you were here
with infrastructure, is
why won't--
If the National Infrastructure Plan is about some certainty and the new
investment assurance process is putting everything
through,
you stand by the decision not to have all of those roads of national significance
being put through that independent process to provide some certainty?
Well they-
The resequencing needs to happen.
Why won't you utilize that process-
They will from the 1st of November, once the commission's up and running.
Once the commission is in charge of assurance, they will
But that won't apply to RONs that are potentially funded through
the NLTF?
If they're high-risk, high-value projects, they will because the cabinet
has oversight through high-risk, high-value projects through
even NLTF-funded roads through that.
Okay.
So we're keen to make more use of proper assurance for these projects.
Right. Of course.
Julian.
In the sequencing of the-- and prioritization of the
major transport projects, is
future time of use charging or more direct
pricing being taken into account in evaluating those projects?
It won't be through the sequencing.
Just in the sense that it will impact the
BCRs.
Yeah. It won't be through the sequencing.
Don't get fixated on the-- or don't get hung up on the sequencing because the
system is indicative.
Okay.
It's all subject to a range of variables from consenting,
from pre-implementation, from geotech,
through all the stuff you need to do to get a road ready,
benefit cost ratios, et cetera. So,
it won't be through the indicative sequencing.
But as part of the preparation for business cases for roads into the future out
over the next 10, 20 years,
yes, if time of use pricing is rolled out then,
and I'm keen that it is, then, yes,
it would be as part of a business case for a road. Yep.
So would time of use pricing have to already be operating for it to
be included in the
planning for these new projects?
Well,
at a program level, at a sequencing level,
as Mr. Udikeri's indicated, people are quite keen to see that.
So
I don't want to wait three years before time of use pricing is underway before we
do that. So I want to do that. That would not meet his definition of soon, and it
wouldn't meet mine either.
But-
We shall-
At an individual roading level, when you take Wellington and Auckland, for example,
some of the roads that are proposed there,
then you would expect time of use pricing, if and when it is implemented, to
factor into the traffic forecasts and the modeling and the business--
the investment case, business case for those particular
projects.
So you wouldn't take it into account in the business
case unless it was already operating?
Because it takes a couple of years-
Well, so-
... to get that going, but it does influence-
Well, sort of-
... demand
... of course.
Yeah.
Of course, you're right. But it sort of depends.
So
if your question is at a sequence program level,
will the sequence take account of time of use pricing?
The answer is no, because it's not operating anywhere.
And so all of it is just basically-
But we think of it operating-
... finger in the air
... in the future.
We do, but
as you know, the
precise scheme that is landed upon for Auckland, there's five different options
under consideration, all of which are quite different.
That really matters in terms of the
way in which it flows through to the system.
And,
so at an individual project level in Auckland or Wellington, let's face it, they're
where we're talking about, then it will.
And if you're doing a business case and there's a proposed scheme that looks likely
that's going to happen, then well, yeah, I'd expect that to be taken into
consideration. So it's not that it has to be literally up and
running. It depends is the short answer.
Okay. Mm-hmm.
If that makes sense.
I'm going to do some subs and then
Carlos. Just the standards of the roads that we're talking about, initially they
were all
...
Yeah. We've moved away from that.
That's been moved away from.
Yeah.
So has that factored into moving away from that, has that factored into the 56
billion?
It's a good question. I think the answer is no.
No.
Oh, yeah. No, actually, some of it will be, but not all of it.
So-
Okay. So that's, yeah
... some of it will have been factored in at the start when we reset the standards,
but some of the roads-
Okay
... are still being considered, like two plus one for some of them is still on the
table, but we haven't made a final decision.
Okay. So 56 doesn't include it but-
So it could still change again
... this is sort of my point about the 56, the numbers kind of,
people have got fixated on it.
Yeah.
But
it's literally a finger in the air.
Yeah.
It's like, yeah, it's about 50 billion.
The point-
And it depends on when you build them and everything, so.
100%. And remember, people go, "Oh, that's a lot of money." And it is a lot of
money, and I'm not
besmirching that. It is a lot of money and I'm worried about how much they
cost.
But it is also over 10 to 20 years.
So no one's talking about building these roads tomorrow all at the same time.
Just want to reiterate that. And we never said that they would be built all at the
same time. And the market could not build them all at the same time.
You'd drive construction cost inflation through the roof.
So it was always going to be over a period of years, and 56
billion over 20 years is
much more manageable. But yeah, just with the caveat that 56
is like a finger in the wind type number.
The other thing I wanted to ask about is other roads, which are not yet roads of
national significance. And we did ask, I did ask about-
We're not adding any new ones to the list.
Well, the one I mentioned, which I have no personal interest in, but
it seems to make a lot of sense is the ring road around Palmerston.
Yep.
The-- because if you've got that as a major distribution-
Yeah. Well, there is some work underway on that. Have you got something on that?
Only other than, yeah, there's a business case being done that will just go into
the standard RLTP process and get prioritized in the NLTP
like any other project.
Okay. Cool.
Or just people being talked about.
Been talked about for a while. There's a new business, there's another business
case being done for that.
Yep.
Okay. And look, the last thing is just growth paying for growth, particularly one
that's not sitting in there at the moment, which would be the biggest one a lot by
country mile, is the Second Harbour Crossing.
That's one area where you might think about growth paying for some of the growth.
But there are others.
How are we progressing with actually being able to-- we know there's not enough
money-
Yep
... at the moment. That is one of the places that we could-
... get a reasonable amount of money.
Yep.
That's an example, but there will be others as well.
Yep. So two good questions. There's a couple of things there.
One is tolling is part of it. So-
The system's meant to be user charges.
Tolling is just a more refined form of user pays, right?
So,
you build a new road, people who drive on the road pay for the road.
Tolling is part of how they pay. It's just a more refined version of
user charges, right?
And we've indicated the new roads should be tolled.
There's a legal process to go through, as you know, because you've just gone
through the land transport revenue process.
There's a legal process to go through around that, but we've signaled
TNL, Te Atatū Northern Link, the old Tara Northern Link-
PNL
... Ōtāhuhu and Penlink. First three is obviously
the entity has given me a recommendation around Belfast to
Pegasus,
and Northland,
which we haven't made decisions on yet, but is working its way through
the process. So that's one thing. So tolling is a part of that.
Second is the Infrastructure Funding and Financing Amendment Bill, which I know
your committee's just considered as well.
It went through finance. FEC.
Oh, it was FEC, was it?
Yeah.
Yeah. My apologies.
Anyway, that's now come back into the House or soon.
I think it has come back, actually.
Mm-hmm.
It has?
Yeah. It's back in the house.
Yeah, so
that expands the scope of infrastructure funding levies and what they can be used
for, and it can now be used for state highways.
Now,
I am keen to see that used. A bit of complexity to it, and it's maybe not
as easy as people think. But at a conceptual level,
if you build a new road out into a greenfields bit of land,
well, who benefits from that? Well, the people who own the land, because they've
got a new road next to them with public expenditure.
I don't think it's unreasonable that we ask the people who are the beneficiaries of
new public investment and infrastructure to stump up with some of the money to
help pay for that. It's essentially a form of value capture.
That's right.
We're not calling it that, but it is essentially a form of that.
The law will also allow it to be used for more brownfields, public
transport projects too. So, if we had a city rail
link, this is what other countries do, right?
When the UK did the Elizabeth line,
they did variants of that
to help fund
the cost of the Elizabeth line in London, and we didn't do that for City
Rail Link. We just did a 50/50 cost split.
The Crown stumped up, Auckland Council stumped up, and we got on with it.
And that was the approach back in 2013/14.
I'm not
bad-mouthing that. That was the decision that was made.
But other countries have a more sophisticated and commercial understanding
about how to fund and finance some of these projects, and
the new IFF levy will
allow us to do that. But there's a bit of water to
go under the proverbial bridge yet on that one.
Sure. But I'm conscious that we've got time-
I think Simon hasn't had a question
... but Simon hasn't had one, and thank you for-
I'm happy to take one. I'm happy to take his time
... your forbearance. He's been very-
Patient
... very patient. So Simon, the floor is yours for a couple questions.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Just coming back to your
suggestion, City Rail Link could have been funded through infrastructure levies.
It sounds laudable. When I went on a tour through City Rail Link-
If he's got the time
... I walked a mile underground, and I don't think there's a single
concession anywhere along that- ...
complex, minister.
Yes.
Where am I going to buy a Coke or a packet of
smokes-
Yes
... or whatever it is I need when I get off the train?
Is that something that maybe could have been considered in the design, actually
providing some revenue for the rail?
Smoking.
Well,
it's almost like you've been a fly on the wall with the meetings the mayor and
I have with CRL.
The mayor won't meet with me. Something I said about speedway.
I agree. For what it's worth, this sort of seems like a
minor matter, but actually I agree with you.
And,
City Rail Link is going to be an incredible project.
It's going to be amazing for Auckland.
I don't think people have worked out quite yet what it's going to do.
It's going to
psychologically change the way in which people think about Auckland.
That in and of itself is actually really important because
you go down there,
it looks like you're in London or New York or Sydney
or Melbourne or whatever. It makes Auckland look like a proper
international city, so that's really important.
However,
I do think there are some missed opportunities. There are concessions.
So,
ministers have been insistent that
there is commercial development in the stations.
I would
like there to be more than there is,
but there is going to be, and
partly it goes back to the way in which they were designed all the way back 10
years or so ago. And
I think it'd be fair to say there's been some missed opportunities there.
But if you go to Singapore, Sydney, London, wherever,
there's cafes, there's
convenience stores, there's bakeries-
Yes
... there's all sorts of different things.
It won't be
quite like that but it can be over time. We can change things over time.
Right.
But the focus at the moment is on getting the--
Focus at the moment, I just want to hasten to add before everyone thinks I'm
fixated on getting a coffee before I get on at
Britomart Station. The
focus is on getting it open.
Yes.
So, Simon, you're done?
I can say from a recent visit to the Kay Road station that they are
actually thinking about a coffee shop now outside the main entrance.
So, I think the
message has got through.
Yes. Ministers have been-
I think we've done enough on coffee
... relatively insistent on-
Right.
Ministers have been quite insistent on-
Eating it
... taking advantage of these things.
We've also--
Oh, I won't go there. Yeah, that's all right.
Okay, fine.
With your forbearance, Nicolaas, he had one sup before.
Okay.
If you can do that.
I just want to make sure. The important question to Auckland-
For James Stone.
James Stone.
But he's going to have now. Can he stay a bit longer?
Sure.
Oh, he's-
Is there any discussion within the cabinet regarding the construction of Second
Harbour Bridge in Auckland?
Yes. There's a pro-- Well, it's long. Yes.
I don't have very long, but I've got to go to ledge committee, but-
Yes, there's a process underway. NZTA
has... I think people will know about this.
The NZTA's been working away on investment cases
over the last couple of years. They've had a barge in the harbor, done an enormous
amount of work on the geotech. We now have a really good understanding
of
what's feasible and
the underlying
challenge.
We now also have a much more detailed understanding of the existing
problems with the bridge,
which I might ask Brett briefly to, or maybe you-
I think we can do that when we close session
... we've got a closed session, so he can take you through the-
Yeah.
But the bridge has had it. It's
70 years old now.
It's showing its age, as you'd expect, and
maintenance costs are expensive now and are going to continue to increase.
The major issue is the closures, the likelihood of significant closures into the
future, unless we sort out a solution.
So we're not rushing this or getting ahead of things.
It's a significant investment decision for the country,
multiple billions of dollars.
So it's really important we get it right, and
I'm determined not to be the minister that creates yet another false
start on an additional harbor crossing in Auckland.
Various other ministers have
tried and failed.
I don't want to be that guy. I'm also really keen that we work in a
collegial and bipartisan way with the opposition around that,
because whatever is decided that we need to do,
it will affect governments and parliaments for-
A long time
... 10 to 15 years.
Mm.
Right? Just in the construction and the delivery alone.
So it has to stick. It has to be a decision that's
made in the national interest, and so we're just working our way through that.
Yeah.
Thank you. Okay, I'm on that note-
Thank you
... thank you very much. Really appreciate it.
Thank you.
Thanks.
No, I'll take him.
Don't go anywhere, Simon.
We're holding on to you.
I think England's up 2-4 against Croatia.
2-4?
Yeah.
That's a high score.
Oh, yeah. Stop doing that.
I think they'll tell us.
Tell us. Sam, don't tell us.
Eh?
Don't tell us.
Oh, okay.
A bit late now.
It's a good start though. Very good start.
Right. Do you want a second to reset?
Sorry. No, I think we're all good. We're all good.
Well,
some do, but no. Box on, because I'm conscious of your time as well.
No worries.
So if there are things that you wanted to-
Yeah, yeah
... there's two things that are most particularly on your
radar-
Yeah
... that'd be good to know.
Just thanks to the committee for the invitation to come and speak to
some of the
areas I've got under my delegation.
I won't go on too long, but just wanted to highlight a few things that I think are
particularly relevant to those out there in the community.
The budget
does a number of things in my areas around maritime aviation and around
transport accident investigation, but particularly new funding for
24/7 air traffic control services at Base
Ohakia to help with some of our alternative landing opportunities.
The new rain radar in Nelson Tasman I think is going to be beneficial for those in
the top of the south who faced those severe weather events last year.
The Coastal Shipping Resilience Fund, which has been publicized
quite widely previously, has been fully allocated and those
projects are underway.
Chatham Islands replacement ship, I'm sure local members will be interested in,
contracts have been signed and that
vessel
has started construction, I believe, and on track for delivery
2027. And then finally, a significant amount of resource has gone
into search and rescue funding,
and that is based on the Section 9
transport funding, which comes out of fuel excise,
which might be an interesting topic when we talk about the future sustainability
of how we fund our search and rescue services if fuel
use continues to decline over the coming years.
But they were really my highlights out of the budget, and happy to take your
questions. At Mr. Utakere's insistence, I'll hang around
for another few minutes.
Right. Questions. Paepy.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you, Minister.
You've touched on the Base Ohakia
increased funding for
24/7 sort of operations there. That comes at
the expense of towage and salvage capability
in the Cook Strait.
One of the entities that you are responsible for,
TAIC. Is that how you say that?
TAIC.
Transport Accident Investigation.
Transport Accident Investigation Commission,
indicated in recent reports that there is a
need for capacity within the Cook Strait, one of
the more difficult parts of water crossings in the world.
So how comfortable are you with,
some might say, the lack of resource or provision, adequate provision to
mitigate any future concerns that might arise?
Yeah. We need to separate the two issues out because while they are related in the
sense that the funding from the Emergency Ocean Response capability
was reprioritized within Transport to help fund alternative
landing for Ohakia,
they weren't contingent one on the other.
So the decision to stop the
EORC project was not made with the Ohakia project
in mind. They are completely separate.
It just so happens that we were able to retain funding within Transport and
use it for,
some would say, a related service, providing alternative
landing for wide-body aircraft in Ohakia.
If you look into the papers behind the EORC project,
essentially it boils down to the cost of providing a permanent
on-call vessel
And didn't stack up against the benefits that it would provide.
If you look through some of the figures, I'll try and do them off the top of my
head as much as possible. But I think they were around about
$23,000 a day to have the vessel on call.
It was maybe over about five years, 28 to 30 incidents,
I think that possibly could have been-
Yeah, the benefits could have only been realized in about 1% of maritime incidents.
Yeah.
So a large cost for a very
limited time it would be used.
And if you look at TAKE's report into the Kaitiaki where they lost power,
that essentially demonstrated that a dedicated EORC vessel wouldn't have made a
difference in that instance. So you're talking about a significant investment on a
vessel which would
only be able to be used in very rare and minor of opportunities.
And I think probably the better investment would be to focus on how do
you improve the quality of vessels in and around the Cook Strait?
How do you make sure that when incidents are
happening, that our search and rescue capability is stood up very quickly, and
that there are alternatives on hand.
And I think in the Kaitiaki, it was a commercial vessel, which was
procured to help out in that instance.
So I'm fairly comfortable that we've landed in the right space.
Okay.
Can I just ask about TAKE, because one of the things that this committee in its
annual review identified was the lack of follow-through or
compulsion, really, with some of the recommendations that are coming through.
You're the responsible minister.
I know this doesn't necessarily require budget lines as such, but in terms of it
being forward-thinking, is that something that you are also
concerned about in terms of where those
recommendations go post they've been published?
Yeah, that is interesting because TAKE write really good reports, and I'd encourage
anyone out there to go and read them as they come out.
They're very
plain English. They're very straightforward.
They analyze what happened, what went wrong, and what needs to be fixed
on a systemic level. It's kind of similar, I think, to the coroner's reports, where
there is a lot of value in the reports, but ultimately, it needs to be up to
the, I guess, the political decision-makers as to how they follow through on that.
You could strengthen, for example, the response of Parliament or the response of
government to those reports. I'm not sure they're tabled in
Parliament, for example. I'm not sure they required a response.
You really only hear about them, we've only really heard about them through the
annual report process.
Mm.
I know the chair of this committee raised the point in that process, too.
So there's no thinking about compulsion.
Whether you could strengthen how agencies respond to the recommendations is
probably worth looking into.
Yeah.
The commission actually, if you have them in at some point through-
We did last week.
You did. So they're doing a lot of work in and around using technology to help with
their report writing process, to the point where I think they're going to be able
to increase the number of investigations they do by using technology to
dig back through years and years of case history and find similarities.
And I think a lot of their reports do note, or their annual report at least notes
when they've made recommendations and they don't think things have changed.
But we don't have any intentions at this stage to make it compulsory, but it is
probably worth looking at.
Yeah.
Yeah, that was one I was going to ask about as well.
So we'd be interested in your further thinking about that.
Yeah.
Because it did seem to be a bit of a-
They're a really good, small, well-run organization.
I think they produce a lot of value for what they do.
Yeah. Cool. Okay. Other questions. Julianne.
Yeah, I did want to ask about the Chatham Islands shipping
solution.
Once the contract has finished,
what will be the funding arrangement to ensure there's still
access to the Chathams?
Yeah. So the contract, the 24.3 million, I think is in the appropriation.
That's right, yeah.
That is to
both procure the vessel, but also it requires the
services to be provided over 20 years.
20 years, yeah. 20 years. So we're basically helping with the building of the
vessel. And as part of that, there's an ongoing commitment that they'll
maintain service for 20 years.
For 20 years. But at the end of the 20 years,
the vessel will just belong to the private partner?
Yeah. It will.
It will do. Yeah.
Yeah.
And there'll be no guarantee of ongoing
service at that point.
There's the option to-
Sorry, Dave, if you'd...
This is David. Sorry. I should have introduced, sorry, Brad Ward and Ruth Vehicle,
Ministry track.
There will be an option to extend the service for another period of
time. At that point, there will be questions about
whether there are viable private market solutions for
servicing the Chatham Islands. So closer to the time when this contract ends,
there will have to be some consideration about whether a viable private
sector option is still there.
The vessel still might have some usable life in it, just as
the Southern Tiari has some residual useful life in it.
So there's going to be a whole lot of questions that we're going to have to
navigate closer to the time when the contract comes to its end.
I will note the Ministry did a really good job at negotiating the contract.
So including terms in there that essentially
require quite a high level of service, so minimum numbers of services.
So at least 14
services a year with capacity to grow to 17.
I think there were requirements in there to continue to service Timora and Apichts.
Yeah.
Quite, I guess, strong oversight into how the service
performs.
But what's the penalty if
that service level isn't achieved?
There are penalties built into the contract, and the ultimate sanction is walk and
rights for the Crown.
And then at that point,
what's the solution for the Chathams?
Because it's like you might-
We don't want to be getting to that point.
Yeah.
But if we actually had to face that scenario, we'd actually have to give
consideration of how we'd actually continue the operations of that vessel service
at the Chathams, but that would be the priority for that vessel.
That's why it's been designed as a bespoke service for the Chatham
Islands community. That's its primary goal and purpose.
And it is able to take live animals?
Yes, it does. And we work closely with NPI on
the stance for taking livestock.
And when are we expecting the service to begin?
At the end of next year.
End of next year.
Yeah. And that's before the Southern Te Ari is due to be retired in March
28.
There's some work being done at the moment, both to continue the
service of Southern Te Ari. There's funding available to continue that through to
2028.
Yeah.
I've just signed off on further remedial work on the Southern Te Ari, just to make
sure it gets us through to the next step.
And there's some additional work being done with another vessel that McCollum
Brothers have as a backup if the Te Ari went offline-
Okay
... for a while. So there's some backup options.
That's very important.
Okay. Right. A primary from Carlos.
Minister.
Do you have a question?
You actually allocated quite a big chunk of money to those
search and rescue funding. There's two
organizations. One is search and rescue recreational boating
safety activities, and one is search and rescue
frontline safety and profession services.
What is the different-- what kind of activities is this funding going to
support?
Look, the first activity class is around the
maritime recreation boating safety part of
search and rescue. So just take a step back.
Maritime New Zealand have got coordination responsibility for search and rescue
activities in New Zealand. They're the lead response agency for that, and then we
sort of delegate down funding responsibilities.
On sea and then police on land.
Yeah, on sea, police on land. So, the first half of it goes
to
things like
Marlborough Nelson Marine Radio Association,
279,000 to continue to operate its very high frequency
channels that ensure the safety of recreation boat users in Tasman, Nelson,
Marlborough. Then the second activity class is to support
organizations like Land Search and Rescue,
Mountain Safety Council,
youth search and rescue services when they were around.
And so that's to support both the activities, the training, and also the
equipment for those operators as well.
And I'll just note to the committee that the Search and Rescue Awards are taking
place in Parliament next week. So if you'd like to meet some of those heroes
who go out there and keep us safe, you're welcome to join us next week.
So I'll try to clarify. The first half is more like the frontline action,
and then the second half is more for education, is it?
No, it's more in the what the activity is.
So the first part of the funding is more around the marine maritime cross
phase.
On land.
And the second half is essentially your on land and a bit of aviation
services.
And how can this kind of funding can be more sustainable in the
future?
Yeah, I raised it at the top. So currently, a lot of those organizations, the
funding for this comes out of, it's called Section 9 of the-
Land Transport
... Land Transport Act.
And which is based on the fuel excise you pay when you fill up your
cars and your petrol. But it also goes into filling up your boats and some of your
small airplanes. And so it recognizes that those
users contribute to fuel excise, and so it
gives back some of that excise basically to invest into search and
rescue activities which benefit those users. It's kind of like a club good.
Now, as the efficiency of vehicles increases over
time, the amount of fuel you use will decrease.
It's the same issue you've got in the land transport space.
And so, there'll be an issue eventually about
if there's diminishing use of fuel and therefore fuel excise, how do you
continue to
fund very important search and rescue activities?
And it's something that I think that the ministry is contemplating as we
slowly get towards that point in time.
And of course, it will have to be tackled at the point where
road user charges-
That's right
... are introduced to light vehicles and potentially fuel excise disappears
completely.
So what outcome are you expected?
Well, you'd want to maintain the investment in our search and rescue activities.
I think any analysis would show that it's an
investment worth making. I mean, the idea of,
myself, I've got the hunting and fishing role.
I want to encourage more people into hunting and fishing.
And to do that, you want to make sure families are confident that their partners,
when they go out
fishing out on a bar, are going to come home safely at night.
Or if you
want to explore the outdoors and if you're lost in the bush, you want to have
confidence that if you get into trouble, someone's going to be there to help you.
So I think it's an important investment to make, and you want to maintain at least
minimum operating levels over time.
The committee's pretty fundamental. I would have thought. Simon.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Just switching lanes,
Minister. I'm interested in your
plans to speed up the rulemaking program for civil aviation.
Yeah.
This committee have taken off submissions, not just in this parliament, but in the
previous parliament about the performance or lack of CAA,
particularly when it comes to things like
adapting our regulatory system to allow for drones and tech to be used.
Just want to give us a bit of an overview as to what that program of work looks
like.
So it's part of the shift within Civil Aviation Authority to
be more responsive to customer needs and to be an enabler
of aviation growth rather than a pure regulator or a
policeman with a heavy stick. So,
I was actually at CAA on Monday for a couple of hours to work with the rules
program team to take me through the first 10 or 11 projects.
They are essentially trying to do 20 years of
overdue rule update and modernization in the next two.
So it's going to take a bit of investment, a bit of time.
Agricultural drone use is part of that.
There are other issues around,
the example that floats around is that Air New Zealand has a
777 that's grounded in San Francisco or wherever it is,
and
the Boeing maintenance team over there is not certified to do work on the
plane through CAA. So Air New Zealand has to send their own team over there at
great cost expense to fix the plane,
check it out, certify it, and then bring everyone back.
Now, the cost in that is both the travel and the crew time, but also the downtime
of the plane, right?
Mm-hmm.
It would make sense for Air New Zealand to be able to use Boeing, who make the
planes, to be the certified maintenance team as well.
So there's some changes around the rules program to make that process easier.
Other things like recognizing qualifications from overseas pilots and
overseas engineers more easily.
Simple stuff around
pilot training and pilot training programs. There's a lot of stuff in there.
It means 20 years of rules. And even some basic stuff, like removing old
definitions and general tidy-ups.
And the final one would be ICAO did an audit, which is the international,
essentially, body which looks at the performance of countries
on their aviation sector. And they did an audit of us last year
and made a number of recommendations.
So this program attempts to modernize our rules to
come up to line with their standards. Not everything they want.
There are some things that we can hold back on because we've got unique
situations in New Zealand. But if we want to maintain our
reputation as a safe country to travel to, we have to work harder to
make sure our international audit is at sort of the 90% level as
well.
Excellent. Thank you, Mr. Minister.
Tangi.
Thank you. My question follows on from Mr.
Courts and CAA.
Just over a week ago, what was made public was,
for example, a CAA investigator having to be reinstated.
Previously, CAA had indicated there was an issue with culture and that they
had sort of changed that. This committee has initiated a
briefing into the conduct of the CAA in terms of
engagement with this committee. Do you have confidence
that the CAA is operating at a level that
actually
takes on board its responsibilities in light of just two recent
examples?
Yeah, I do, and there's a couple of reasons for that.
I met with the chair and the chief executive on Monday, just
prior to the rules update team. A lot of the issues that you were
talking about and are raised publicly, so I think it's fair to raise them,
are what you might call legacy issues of a,
quite frankly, a relatively poor culture or perception of a poor culture within
the CAA over the last six, seven years.
There's been
essentially a refresh of
both the board, but also the senior leadership team in CAA, including a new
director. And I think
those cultural issues are now legacy issues, that the
examples we're hearing about are probably things that happened two, three, four
years ago that are coming to resolution and
finding a way of resolving those conflicts.
And I've got confidence that the attitude of the director and also the
culture within the organization has turned around, and it's a positive place to
work, and they don't find it difficult attracting people into the organization.
So I have confidence in the director and the board and how they're managing.
Do you maintain that view? I
accept the point that there might be
a basis of legacy stuff, and often that sort of comes through.
Mm-hmm.
But without delving into the specific details around the briefing that this
committee has opened, that is something that has happened recently.
So
is it that the organization is still working through a change process,
and there might just be a few tweaks that might need to be made?
Could be. That could be fair. It's hard because we're in a public session.
I don't want to delve into private-
Sure
... sort of employment issues. But if it's the issue I'm thinking of, that
might have
had its origins a couple of years ago, and the actual
operations of the organization have improved since then.
I guess the guarantee I can give to the committee is that the
director is very much aware of the need to continue to improve,
both externally to customers as a regulator, but also internally in their
organization. And I've got confidence that they are doing that, that they are on
the right track. But I would also be interested in the outcome of the
committee's briefing as to where further improvements could be made.
Thanks.
I'm going to just ask you a couple of quick questions.
First of all, the Aviation Council.
Mm-hmm.
Just wanted to see if there's anything in particular they are raising, how you
see it going.
Yeah.
It seems intuitively it's a good thing to bring the sector together.
Yeah, I think it is a good thing, and I think last time we were here, we
acknowledged that it was established under the previous government as an interim
council and then made permanent. They have an aviation action
plan, and I think 10 to 12 of those actions have already been
achieved. A number of them are well underway.
They've been operating well. It would be fair to say that the
war in Iran and the fuel crisis has consumed a lot of
people's time in the transport space, particularly around aviation.
And some of the stuff that we have on our work plan that we'd like to see
progress has to take a bit of a back seat to dealing with issues
around jet fuel and around general
issues in the aviation sector in response to that fuel crisis.
But we're at the point now where I think
the signs are looking good internationally, and
the council will turn their focus back to some of those issues we've tasked them
with, including workforce development, some issues around accessibility
on flights and in airlines. And I know the Petitions Committee
is currently considering a petition from a consumer
around passenger rights. And then we've also
launched the on-time performance reporting to make
sure that we are keeping an eye on how airlines are
performing with their connections in and out of the regions, too.
So as the
attention shifts away from the fuel crisis and back towards some of those more
forward-looking programs we wanted to get into, I think we'll see more progress
from the council before the end of the year.
But Ruth, you chair that council and you-
Yes. We've got a meeting next week, over the next couple of weeks, and we'll be
looking at what we've done over the last 12 months, and then looking ahead to how
we can be refreshing the plan into the future. So it's going well.
And can I just ask one other question, which is in the aviation area, which is just
the conversations you will be having with Air New Zealand, no doubt.
Just your
Your view on how things are progressing, the challenges that they might be facing,
but
how it might affect aviation in New Zealand and
internationally as well.
So my discussions with Air New Zealand are always on a sector
perspective. So I guess my responsibility is making sure that we've got a
well-functioning
aviation sector, good connectivity between the regions, and also
make sure we're an attractive destination for international flights as well.
And so I'm very wary of never overstepping the line that there are
shareholding ministers who have shareholder responsibilities.
But for the last few months, the conversation has been around
fuel price and supply.
It's been positive that every interaction I've had with Nicole and the leadership
team has been that they are confident around supply, and we've been confident all
the way through. It's just the price has been a challenge.
And you've seen all the airlines responding to that through various ways.
You've seen route reductions.
Every chance I've had to talk to them about their route reductions, I've sought
assurances and received them that they are temporary in response to the fuel
crisis. And so you may see that continue over the
months as the, I think a barrel of jet is still up around about
130 possibly, down from about 200, but around about
130. And so that still carries a bit of burden on
the operating cost of the airlines.
In New Zealand, we're very public in the fact that their fuel bill doubled, but
that's the same for all the regional operators too.
So to be fair, the conversations have been dominated with responding to that, and I
think the sector in general has responded really well.
They've worked well together. Everyone has just wanted clarity
about what the plan would be if there was more
pressure on supply, but thankfully, we've never had to get even close to that
point, and touch wood we won't.
But secondarily to that, and the things I'd like to be talking to Air New Zealand
about is sort of their investment in their technology and their development.
And for anyone who's traveled in and around Auckland or Wellington recently will
have noticed the new rollout of the check-in systems, essentially the
iPad systems. Not only are they space savers, so you don't have those large,
almost like ATM machine things that you needed to go and swipe into these
days. But I've been told that that has sped up the
processing time of check-ins from about an average of about,
I don't know the numbers they told me, but say a minute 30 or two minutes down to
someone's done it in about 12 or 15 seconds.
And so the better you can speed up that process, the better they use
technology, the better the experience is for New Zealanders to travel.
And I think you've seen that with the work that AFC have done in security
as well. We don't really have long
queues. I don't get really complaints from colleagues about how long the queues
are.
I think CAA have done a pretty good job about focusing on that
timeliness. But generally, I'd love to see our conversations with Air New Zealand
being about how they get on a growth trajectory rather than just responding to
crises.
Okay. I will call it there.
So we are at time unless anybody else does for a question.
No. No.
Okay, cool. We really appreciate it.
Thank you very much, and we'll see quite a few of you back later on in the day.
Good job. Thank you.
Thank you.
And then every time we message him, he just show up in the door.
Yeah.
Well, maybe. Messaged him five minutes ago. Here he is.
See?
When you message him, he-
I just messaged you.
Two minutes late this time.
Well.
'Cause I need to see the
She said some to...
Oh, I don't know. I haven't got them.
So I'll have
to-
I'll get them.
Yeah.
Well welcome. Sorry, the committee asked for another five minutes, and some of them
have taken seven, so, you know.
Right.
We get that.
Oh.
Right. Well, welcome back again. Long time no see.
so now with our ministers,
to,
grab your collective style, um, I'll-
I will hand it over to you for some introductory comments.
Um, I don't know who wants to go first, but, um-
Chair, I'll go.
Okay.
If that's okay. Try and be as brief as I can be.
Um, so first of all, good morning, Chair, members of the committee.
Thank you for the opportunity to, uh,
speak to you today. Um, got with me, uh, Brad
Ward, acting, uh, Chief Executive of MOT, um,
Brett Galideen, uh, CE of NZTA, and, um,
Cassando, Deputy Chair NZTA at front.
And then, uh, very well supported by our respective SLT,
uh, teams, uh, behind us.
Um,
also, uh, just want to acknowledge, this will be the last select committee,
uh, that the Ministry of Transport will attend, obviously, as we,
we merged with NZTA come, uh, one July.
Um, just, I'll just go for a few quick highlights and then,
um, crack on with questions, if that's okay.
Um, look, in terms of highlights, uh, revenue
program, moving more towards a universal road user
charging system. The ministers talked about that.
Uh, we progressed legislation through, uh, this committee.
Obviously, that is f-focused around all road users, uh,
you know, paying based on the distance they travel and therefore how much they use
of the roading network. Um,
create a fairer, simpler, and a more modern transport funding system.
And obviously, as we talked about before, uh, time use charging
legislation, uh, has also been progressed as well.
So we're looking at, you know, obviously extending, uh, the range of revenue
tools, which is important as we try and get funding sus-sustainability around
transport system.
Um, safety and rules reform. A significant
program of reform to, uh, transport rules to improve productivity
and, and modernize them. We have a lot of out-of-date rules,
uh, some going back to 1950, '60s, probably even earlier, I think.
Um, but at, while keeping safety front and center as well.
So a couple of highlights there. Driver licensing system changes, which
have been announced recently. Changes to warrant and certificate of fitness
time frames, um, and the rollout of roadside drug testing.
Uh, budget '26, a number of significant investments.
We've alluded to some of those already.
Cambridge to Porirua,
uh, road of national significance, funding for state highway resilience,
um,
uh, increased investments in rail through either
metro or the, uh, freight network
as well. Um, Middle East response, um,
we played a key role as a ministry, uh, in working with NZTA
around the government's fuel response.
Uh, a number of key parts there. Uh, the work with the aviation sector on
the jet fuel plan,
uh, regulatory options around diesel use, uh, if we had to
go to a phase four of the response plan,
um, and public transport advice, as well as pretty, uh,
extensive monitoring, uh, material around, um, changes in behaviors, which
we put onto our MOT website pretty early on.
Um, just like to thank the Freight Advisory Council, the Aviation
Council. Um,
industry worked with us in a,
in a pretty, uh, impressive, uh, constructive way through the whole fuel
crisis. Obviously, we're seeing some, um, positive,
uh, noise come out, uh, now around, um, the Middle East, but, um, just want
to thank the industry, particularly the Freight Advisory Council, for their
constructive work through that process.
Um, obviously we're moving as a ministry, as I said, um, to
NZTA. We've been supported by Public Service Commission in terms of that
transition.
Uh, look, proud of the achievements of the ministry
and, um, NZTA and what we're doing in the transport sector.
Happy to take questions.
Thank you, Brad. Um, Brett, do you want to say anything as well?
No, I don't think so.
No, I think we'll-
Sandra?
We won't consume committee time.
Okay.
I'd just like to note the apologies of the chair who's unable to be here today.
Understand that. Okay, cool. Um, questions.
Um, we'll start with Tangi, and then Alex, and then Dan.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, I've just got a, a, some
sort of questions that have arisen from the session this morning.
Um, they'll all be towards the TA. I've also got a number of other
questions that probably in terms of time might be best as post-hearing questions,
Mr. Chair.
Yeah.
Um, about individual RONs, where things are at.
Oh, yeah.
You know, I know we've done that rather than, um, using time on that.
Um,
one of the things that did come out i-is the, uh, ability
for, uh, look- when looking at the RON's, uh, suite of,
of work, you indicated that some of those are looking at a
two plus one arrangement. Which of the RON's projects does
that relate to?
Yeah, probably the two that still have that opportunity are the Northland Corridor
beyond the current phase that we've got in
procurement,
and Southern Links potentially has got that opportunity, even Tauriko West.
The way we look at it, though, is that we'll consent and designate for
four lanes to maintain optionality, and then as you go
through into the more detailed business cases into making that
decision to build or decision to invest, that is when that final decision will
be made. There's a lot of factors that go into making a decision
on two plus one. So a two-lane state highway can sort
of, at its upper limit, is at about 20,000 AADT, 20,000
vehicles a day at its upper limit.
A four-lane highway can take 45,000 vehicles a
day. Obviously, a two plus one sits somewhere in between that.
And then there's other factors that come in because you're, in essence, it's
swapping the two lanes from one side of the road to the other, so you create
a merge. So you have to think about how that merge, you think about the mix of
vehicles. Obviously, heavy vehicles cause slower
merges and can cause congestion through merging.
The topography as well, how steep it is, how windy it is.
So there's a lot of factors you have to consider.
Okay, thank you.
The minister indicated in terms of tolling recommendations that's currently for
him,
was it just Northland then Belfast to Pegasus?
Was it?
So he's got
Belfast to Pegasus in front of him, and he's also got
Walkworth to Tahana-
To Tahana
... in front of him.
Okay.
The other two that he haven't made a decision.
The government has made a decision on tolling Ōtaki to North Levin-
Sure
... Penlink, Whakatūmu, and Papamoa East Interchange.
Okay.
What's your understanding of how the
ROMs projects will work alongside the new
investment assurance process that has just been...
I mean, the minister himself indicated that actually,
given the scale of spend potentially that just because
some of these projects might be tagged for funding from the
NLTF-
Yep
... that they would still be put through that process.
So what is your understanding?
Yeah. So as much as really what you know, I think when the minister made the
announcement about this new assurance process, he said it excluded NLTF
funded projects, apart from where they
are of significant size, scale, and risk, in which case he would expect them to
go in there. Now, what those projects are, we haven't looked at any level of
detail about what ones might go in and what ones won't go in.
So we'll be guided by Insert and by the
Infrastructure Commission on that.
Can I just pop in to ask like high value-
Before you do, Tony, if you're okay to sit, yeah.
Just is there a definition for high value, high risk?
No, not that I'm aware of, yeah. I haven't seen one from Infra.
So it could be
500 million, or it could be over 2 billion at-
Yeah, and look, I don't want to comment until someone thinks it through, but dollar
value is an only...
It's pretty rough way of measuring whether something's high value or complicated or
high risk. So hopefully it's a bit more refined than that.
But that is one measure.
No question.
Keep going, Tony.
Come back in.
The other one that the chair alluded to was Te Utanganui, which
is the Manawatu-
Yeah
... sort of, logistical
approach there.
Where are things at in terms of engagement with
NZTA?
Yeah, good question. I probably might have to come back to you-
Okay
... Tony, on the detail around that.
I know that there was some work being done, but I think a business
case was being funded by the
council rather than us, but I think we're involved and we're
supporting in that, but we're not leading that piece of work.
But we can come back and give you an exact update on that.
Okay.
So will you put that in as a follow-up question?
Because if you don't, I will.
No.
Yeah, okay, cool.
Okay.
Okay. That also relates to the ports inquiry we're doing, which we're also
considering the main port. So it's a port in that context.
Right, I think I had Carlos next as the primary, and
then... Sorry, I just checked. We've got primary.
Okay, well, we'll switch it around. Okay, Carlos.
Just follow up from the previous session.
Can you provide an update on the current planning and consideration for the
second Harbour Bridge?
Steph?
Yeah.
The second Harbour Bridge is a topic of conversation that has been
around for a while, and with that, there is a lot
of suggested solutions. NZTA
has done the work and provided a recommendation
to the minister as to what we think is the pathway
forward. The size and scale of any solution for a second harbor
crossing is beyond the means of the LTF,
therefore, the decision sits appropriately with Cabinet.
So
what's happened to the existing Harbour Bridge?
Around the condition of the existing Harbour Bridge?
Yes.
Yeah, that came up and I think we referred it to you.
So look, I can talk about that. Look, the- The Harbour Bridge, the existing
Harbour Bridge has been around for a long time.
And one of the biggest challenges, which is one of the problems we're trying to fix
with the additional harbour crossing, is the load it's carrying.
So it's not a congestion issue as such, it's a load issue, weight of
vehicles. And over time, as traffic has increased, vehicles have got heavier.
Trucks have definitely got heavier. The bridge is being asked to do a lot more.
And we've strengthened it a couple of times, but it's got to the point where we're
unable to add more dead load in, which is strengthening steel
into the bridge without affecting the ability for it to carry live load, which is
the vehicles and heavy vehicles on top.
At the same time, like anything, it's getting to that point where it needs
parts that need to be renewed. So, what people aren't aware of is
that the clip-ons, as they're known, are a very lightweight structure that were
added onto the bridge. They flex considerably.
Mm.
So they're designed to go up and down.
They go up and down by about 700 mils every time a fully laden truck goes
over it. So you can imagine that's going like that.
Mm.
And fatigue is a real issue. So fatigue in the steel in those
structures, and fatigue in the welds in those structures.
So that needs to be constantly renewed and upgraded.
The other things that we have is just corrosion.
So we're starting the process of completely repainting the bridge.
That means stripping it back completely to raw metal, replacing and
fixing the corrosion, and then repainting it, which is quite disruptive, especially
once we get above the deck. And then finally, the deck itself
is again lightweight steel and will need replacing along with the bridge
joints.
And that's one of the more disruptive pieces of work that's going to need to happen
to the bridge where we have to actually replace the deck of the bridge in
time. All things you would expect of an aging
structure. All things that we can do, but they come with disruption.
But all things that are needed so that we can extend the life
definitely for the Harbour Bridge because it's such a critical asset.
So with all this approach, how long you think we can prolong the Harbour Bridge
lifespan?
That is the million-dollar
question. And unfortunately, it's not a million- Maybe it's only a million.
It's cheap.
Yeah.
It is cheap. Let's get it done.
Yeah, okay. Yeah. Multi-billion dollar question.
Look, it's not an exact science. But I would
say that the point of where restrictions are
gonna be required or heavy maintenance is getting sooner rather
than later. And when I say sooner, we're saying in the
next 10 to 15 years. Even now, the amount of maintenance we're
doing on the bridge is increasing every... So we're slowly mapping.
But when those bigger interventions are needed, they're getting closer than they've
ever been.
Will any heavy vehicle will be permitted to use the Harbour Bridge
in order to prevent or to extend
the lifespan of the Harbour Bridge?
Yeah. So the issue of the bridge is not light vehicles.
So you can put as many light vehicles as you want on the Harbour Bridge.
It's the heavy vehicles and the bus fleet, and in particular,
electric buses have-
Particular
... a particular issue there. And at the moment it cannot take
heavy productivity vehicles. So we don't allow trucks that are
over 44 tonne to use the Harbour Bridge now.
And then in time, as freight
continues to increase and the bridge needs further
deloading, further restrictions may be required of the clip-ons, which are lighter
weight structures, onto the main structure-
Okay
... and then more beyond that.
And just now you mentioned about
the electronic bus. What's happening?
What causing the problem to Harbour Bridge?
It's usually the weight. It's heavy. Oh, just the weight of them.
Just the weight. It's just purely weight because of the battery.
So two things there. Strengthening over time would help,
and reconfiguring it with a new harbour crossing will absolutely fix that
issue. Of course, battery technology and time will also help
as they can get that lighter and buses can get within the weight.
It's just purely a weight issue.
Mm.
Okay. So let's focus. Let's get all the questions about the Auckland crossings,
existing and potential,
out of the way. So I have Dan and then Julie Anne.
Thanks
for letting us for coming in today, Brett.
Really enjoyed the visit to the Auckland Harbour crossing.
Yeah. Got a good day. It was sunny.
Great day.
Just for the benefit of the committee, could you outline kind of the general
maintenance costs of the bridge currently and then the forecast
maintenance? Because that, I think, quite surprised me in terms of the
actual costing.
Yep. Yeah, don't quote me on the exact numbers because I haven't got them in front
of me. But yeah, we've been slowly building up on the amount of
money we spend on the Harbour Bridge.
And I believe that we're now getting in the order of
90 to 100 million per annum in investment into
maintaining the Harbour Bridge. And we see that continuing to increase year on
year, and it's gonna get up into the multiple hundreds of
millions in time, especially once some of those bigger interventions are happening.
Mm.
You know, 15, 20 years ago, we were only investing $20, 30 million
into the maintenance of the bridge.
So it's definitely showing that more care-
Mm
... and more maintenance is needed.
And as you saw when you were up there, we've started with...
The public can't see, but we have started the process of repainting the bridge.
We're underneath the bridge now doing the first sections.
That's quite a complicated process of
removing layers and layers of paint over numerous years.
That comes at, uh, which is quite heavy and also hard to remove right
back to bare steel, fixing the steel-
Mm
... and then repainting it with modern technology-
... and moving our way across the bridge. And that's gonna take many years.
Great. And in terms of the
next phase of the planning for the additional harbour crossing.
So current decision sits with Cabinet.
Give us a sense of just what the public should expect throughout this
year in terms of key milestones.
I don't think we necessarily have any key milestones that we've
created. But the minister and the government have been very
clear about the engagement and commitments they've made to Auckland.
Mm.
And it's our expectation that with all concerned parties there'd be a-
And relative,
strong engagement with the public.
Yep.
Thank you. And does NZTA have a view?
I know the Mayor of Auckland has a particular
route that he
wishes to explore. Does NZTA have an official
view on that?
Give us, because it does affect-
Yeah
... I'm the local MP for the area, so.
Well, I think as a delivery agency, we don't have views on many things.
We just get on and do them. And
as I mentioned earlier, it's such an important city for us.
It's such an important part of our transport network.
The mayor, amongst a lot of other people, has put proposals or
preferred routes
forward. I think every proposal that's been mentioned publicly,
NZTA has looked at.
Mm-hmm. Great.
Juliet.
Could you just tell the committee what percentage of vehicles crossing the bridge
every day are heavy vehicles?
Oh, gosh. You're testing me.
That might be a follow-up question.
Unless you can.
It's under 10%, though. It could be like 5%.
I honestly can't remember off the top of my head.
Okay. It's a-
But we'll find the number for you.
It's
small, though. We're not talking about more than 10%.
Yeah. Well, there's obviously a large number of light vehicles that use it.
Yeah.
So that affects the percentage.
Is there a reason why heavy vehicles aren't currently restricted from
using the clip-ons?
Yeah, just fatigue, damage, and weight.
No, but I mean, are they?
No, but that would be why we're-
Well, wouldn't that be a logical thing to do now?
Is say-
Yeah, and we will do that
... heavy vehicles shouldn't go on the clip-ons.
Yeah. So we don't want to rush to that decision before we need to do it because
there's other factors you have to take account of.
The factors that heavy vehicles then have...
The way the lane configurations work, you've got the heavy vehicles then
crossing multiple lanes, so they
often prefer not to be on the clip-ons anyway.
Yeah.
They prefer to be on the main structure.
Right.
But we haven't gone ahead and restricted that as of yet.
We still allow that.
When the Western Ring Route was
proposed and funded, it was touted as an
alternative to-
Yep
... the Harbour Bridge for freight and heavy vehicles in particular.
Has that actually-
Yep
... happened?
It has.
Is that taking pressure off the bridge?
It definitely helped with the bridge, but we're finding freight
volumes continue to increase, and the bridge still plays a critical role in the
movement of freight around Auckland and into Northland.
I mean, you're saying freight volumes are increasing, but you don't know the
percentage of the vehicles-
I haven't got it off the top of my head.
No. So we can get that.
So approximately there's about 184,000 vehicles per day over the
existing bridge. About 12,000 of those, give or take, are
freight. So you can assume
heavy vehicle. And about 35,000 bus
passengers. So-
Bus passengers is-
Still a significant amount-
Not vehicles
... freight vehicles going across. Yeah. 12,000.
It seems like that's about 7%.
Yeah, I think-
And I think the 38,000 passengers are going on 1,000 buses.
Oh, they will. Yeah, they're not going on-
So it's not very many buses.
But I think you have to put in, as Brett said, you have to put in perspective too
that
at the end of the day, these are heavy vehicles and freight,
and they are looking for, obviously, the quickest way to get from point A to point
B.
And every time the bridge has to close because of a
weather event or there's a restriction on
load, that's a productivity hit as well.
So the numbers might seem relatively low, but productivity impact.
But I guess we don't have direct pricing right now to reflect
the cost of the maintenance or the cost of the life of
the clip-ons and the bridge being shortened by the current use.
Wouldn't it make sense to be taking steps now to ensure that
we're not accelerating the pressure on the bridge,
given there are alternative routes, given that...
Yeah. So you're exactly right, and don't think that we're not.
So that's the asset management plan for the bridge.
Obviously, the perfect scenario is that you don't have to put any restrictions on,
and freight can move on both the Western Ring Route or on the Harbour Bridge.
100%--
Why is that a perfect scenario?
So that it's the most efficient way to move freight, depending on where it's
heading to and where people are going.
But I guess you're assuming an endless subsidy from the public-
Juliet, Juliet
... to build the infrastructure to enable that.
Which is exactly why then you then have an asset management plan that looks at the
deteriorating life of the bridge, and then how you manage that going forward.
Investment and renewals is one aspect. Restrictions is another.
And that's all what we are constantly reviewing and reflecting when we look after
the bridge.
Dan.
Just in relation to that,
clearly a big pain point for Auckland is those bridge
restrictions and closures.
Has NZTA looked at other more optimal
ways of
risk management during kind of significant weather events to, for
example,
using the Western Ring Route for freight so that we can
keep the bridge open at full capacity?
Yeah, it's really challenging.
The reason it's challenging is because the structure of the Harbour
Bridge
goes above the bridge deck, which is what caused the problems a few years ago when
the bridge got struck by a heavy vehicle.
The way that we manage it is in a staged approach.
So that is why we often, and you'll see when bad weather's
coming in, you'll see warnings that the Harbour Bridge may close today.
We encourage that on the motorway as well, and we definitely encourage vehicles
and heavy vehicles onto the Western Ring Route as part of that.
And then as the winds increase, then this goes to restrictions-
Mm
... and then ultimately a full closure if it goes over a certain threshold to
protect the integrity of the bridge.
So we constantly review those thresholds. We look overseas.
There's other bridges around the world that do similar things because of wind, to
make sure that we're We're balancing the risk
versus the access and economic benefit
of-
Mm
... having it open.
But does NZTA look at alternatives
or... Because I guess the current approach is a big pain
point for many Aucklanders.
Yeah. It's really hard to
control. So you could say, look, you can ban high-sided
vehicles, but unless you've got a mechanism to absolutely get them off the
bridge, that's quite hard to do. We are looking at other ways of opening and
shutting the bridge faster because that's often the issue.
Like once it's shut, how quickly can we open it again?
And we are looking at various systems and other things that might allow us to do
that more efficiently.
Mm.
So yeah, we are constantly looking at it, but it's quite hard to manage.
Understood. Thank you. Thanks.
Couple of questions from me on the bridge as well.
So
once you've done all of the maintenance, it sounds like the
maintenance is ramping up, and we've got a lot of maintenance to do with painting
and deck replacement and so on.
Yeah.
Once you've done all that, does it then drop back from that point?
Yeah. Look-
It will then ramp up some later stage.
Yeah, of course it would.
Yeah.
Yes. Yeah. So once you
do large renewals, then the next need for that renewal will push
further out. Yep.
And the ultimate life of the bridge, if
you've done the maintenance, does it keep the bridge going for
as long as you want it to keep going?
Yeah, that's our approach and our asset management plan is
indefinite life of the bridge.
That's in relative terms. So, there may be a need at some point to
replace the clip-ons and replace bigger parts of it, but the intent is
to keep the bridge running indefinitely. Yes.
Okay. And its ultimate capacity in terms of its ability
to cope with... If Auckland stopped growing today and just had the
traffic volumes you've got today-
Yeah
... would the bridge suffice?
Yeah. So-
With all the maintenance that's been programmed?
Yeah. So the capacity is a slightly different issue with the Harbour Bridge.
So the Harbour Bridge-
Right. The capacity includes weight too.
Oh, yeah. So, yeah, with weight...
Well, no, because it's already got significant weight on, and these renewals are
coming.
Yes.
So we're going to have to do those renewals.
With regards to capacity from a vehicle volume
perspective, the bridge is eight lanes.
It runs four four into peak, and then in the peak we run at five three.
It is constrained at either end because of the traffic you can get through
from the Esmonde Road end and through Skinnery Junction, which
holds it back. What we're finding now though is
that as the peak is spreading and travel patterns change in Auckland,
that the inter-peak period of four four is now becoming challenging
because that's not enough capacity
as the morning and afternoon peaks spread further across the
day. So there's a whole lot of ways that you can deal with that, which I'm
sure the member will say time of use charging is definitely one that-
Well, I'm sure
... would help with that.
So, what I was trying to get at is that if Auckland
there was no further growth in either freight volumes or in
traffic volumes
and weights and so on, would that Harbour Bridge suffice at the moment?
It might not be perfect. It might not be A level of service.
It might be a B level of service at some times. But would it suffice?
I'm trying to get a picture of whether that can do the job for now.
Oh.
But acknowledging that as Auckland grows, then that's what drives...
I'm trying to get a feel for what is driving the second crossing.
Is it the growth or is it the-
The state
... is it the state of the existing bridge, and you've got to do something with the
bridge itself?
Correct.
The bridge has got to certain maintenance-
And to do those renewals will be incredibly disruptive.
You won't be able to maintain eight
Sorry.
It will be incredibly disruptive.
The renewals have to happen at some point, and they will be incredibly disruptive
in including closure of lanes for long periods of time,
diversion of
traffic volume. That is going to happen no matter what now
to keep the bridge maintained and in the state it
needs to.
And so my final question then, Julie, and you've got to supp as well in a second,
is that you've given a rough timeframe for the major renewal
work that's required.
Yep.
So you're sort of saying 10, 15,
20 year kind of timeframe-
Yep
... for all of that. Does that mean that we actually need to have...
Because I can't imagine that we would get a second crossing designed, delivered,
et cetera,
certainly before 10-
Yeah
... will be heroic. But
what's your thinking around this whole thing around sequencing?
Well, ultimately, that's the decisions that cabinet are going to have to weigh
up.
Yes. Well, what's the advice you're going to be giving?
The disruption versus the need for the second to
balance that.
So what is the advice that you're giving about the sequencing of...
If you're saying you've got to do between 10 and 20 years, roughly, you've got to
do this major work, and if you don't do it, then presumably you've got a real
problem with the existing bridge.
Yes.
Ultimately.
Okay. So what is the advice you're giving about a second Harbour Crossing in terms
of timing in relation to the asset management of the existing
bridge?
We can give
advice on what we think the preferred solution is.
We can give advice on timing. This is one asset within an entire land
transport system, and-
It's quite a big one
... transport itself is
one aspect within the government's financing.
So while we can provide a recommendation
from that perspective, how all those factors
come together is ultimately well above our pay grade.
Look, I understand that. What I'm trying to get is a picture of if
you do not do something with a second crossing-
Mm-hmm
... then
at some time when you've got to do
this work, then presumably you're really constraining the ability of the Harbour
Bridge to take the people, like the volumes it's got at the moment for an extended
period of time. Yes? So that would then mean that traffic would have to go around.
It would have a reasonably significant impact on Auckland.
Yep.
And on freight. That's what I'm trying to get a feel for that kind of advice.
Look, I think Brett has answered in terms of the time frames from when those
renewals need to happen, and that's the context for the time frames in
which other decisions would need to be made
Okay, so challenge, right?
Yeah, we want to extend the...
You want to delay renewals as long as you can.
Not only from a capacity perspective, but from a use of capital.
So you don't want to spend it before you need to, and that's what we're constantly
doing and looking at how we can maintain and renew it to delay those
bigger renewals, which is what we've been doing for the last 15 years.
So that's why it's not an absolute.
And we'll continue to do that, to push that out as long as we can.
Okay. Julia?
I just wanted to know what
work has been done in looking at alternatives
for the additional Western Port Harbour Crossing.
Has it included time of use charging as one of the
scenarios?
We have looked at significant
options within existing infrastructure and new infrastructure,
and as I mentioned earlier, I don't think there's a single-
Yeah, is time of use charging-
Considered
... is time of use-- the impact of time of use charging on demand-
It has been considered
... being included-
Yeah
... in the options?
Yeah, absolutely. Time of use definitely helps from a vehicle capacity, which
is what getting it.
It can potentially help, but has other challenges from a heavy vehicle
perspective. But it absolutely is a key part of the conversation because time of
use is now being worked on.
Okay. And I've got one more sup on the Harbour Crossings, and then I think we're
done with that particular one, then I'll go to Simon with the primary care.
Just more like technical issues. We know the Harbour Bridge have been recently
closed by, caused by the strong wind.
So have you done an assessment on the bridge, the long-term resilience
as this continue to age, or are we expecting more
strong, more wind related lane closure or full
closure will become more frequent in the future?
Yeah. So definitely the events are becoming more severe
and the wind events are more extreme, which is causing it to
close more often. It's not the only resilience issue we have through that
corridor, though. And what is another growing issue which we have to deal with in
time is sea level rise and flooding on the
approaches to the Harbour Bridge, which is already starting to
happen in large tides. The bus way down from time and now shows the new and that
will also go into the motorway and will close sections of the motorway over
time. And in fact, we've got great example from the Auckland floods where that
section of the motorway was flooded, including the bus way.
So,
wind, more events and more severe, and we have a
climate change
sea level rise issue as well on the approaches to the Harbour Bridge.
Okay, thank you.
Cool. Right. Okay. Away from the Harbour Crossing.
So anybody comes back to the Harbour Crossing, I will move on very, very fast now.
So, Simon.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
This is a question I think should be first directed to Ruth Fairhall.
Has the board provided direction to NZTA
about the need to avoid gold plating,
excessive scope,
and to focus on value for money and the
minimum viable product? And the case
that stands out starkly for me recently, it's actually local government
cases, the Burnside Bridge in Hawke's Bay, where a bridge contractor
said it could be replaced, it was washed out in Cyclone Gabrielle, could be
replaced with $2.75 million to meet
NZTA's requirements. They do these things all the time.
But the local council had come up with a $16 million two-lane bridge they said they
couldn't afford. I'm really interested as to
what the board's view is on that type of problem and have you
given direction to the agency about how to get better value for
money?
The board is constantly asking the agency to deliver more within the
envelope that we have and how that works with our
local government partners and the projects they're doing is something that we have
been working to increase the messaging very clear about
what the GPS states about not gold plating.
I think that we have a conversation that occurred, I
think at this committee last year around Oto and Allen, some scope
changes. We are constantly looking for how we can
address the ever-increasing demands, needs, wants, desires
of the network as a whole, and make sure
that where there is an option that delivers the functionality that's
required in line with the GPS, in line with the Act, that we
look to do that for the most cost-effective way possible.
And that provides some challenging conversations with,
not only within the agency, but within communities, that ultimately we
understand that we have a limited fiscal envelope in which we have to operate.
And we've got exactly that about this member, but certainly we have
declined funding for a bridge. There's a ford that we've said that's adequate.
It actually got some publicity so slightly to the negative, but to that
exact point, we didn't think the value of investment was worth it.
So, a ford, just describe what that is for the benefits of
the committee who knows listening.
It's basically just a concrete pad in the river that
when the river's not flowing at a high level, you can drive over, and
when it's got high flows, you can't.
Oh, good. Are there any challenges around getting consent
to, say, build a concrete structure like that in a river?
No. Look, I don't know in particular in that regard.
You know consenting as well as I do.
There potentially could be challenges building in the
riverbed at times through consenting, but I don't have a specific
example where we've faced that.
Okay. Just a bit of supplementary-
Yeah
Do you think it would help, given there are consenting challenges, that if
NZTA wanted to roll out standardized designs, that
they could have a standardized consent or national
standard for that type of thing. So if you're working in a water course and
installing culverts, building structures in water courses
like bridge piers, or I use this type of ford or Irish crossing.
Would it be helpful to have a standardized consent that you could apply anywhere
around the country?
Absolutely. I think we do have standardized design that we use where
possible.
Yeah.
But we have something like, I think, 5,000 consents-
Oh
... that have 27,000 conditions.
Oh, okay.
So if we're looking at ways that we can do our work more effectively,
legislative reform in that space
could be of assistance.
100%. And so just following up with you, Brett, is that something
that NZTA has passed on to MFE or officials-
Oh, absolutely
... in resource management before?
Absolutely, yeah. Dan, I'm sure you have as well.
Yeah, in discussions, and I think this is the benefit that NCERT's going to have as
well. Bringing the planning regime, transport, infrastructure,
housing all together, you would expect there'll be efficiencies
and greater alignment, and these issues would be addressed a lot quicker.
Great. Thank you.
There's a bit of promotion for somebody's legislation.
Oh, it's just testing the waters. Particularly
how difficult it might be to waters here.
Yeah, I've seen that. So it was very ...
Silly numbers being thrown around. Tangi.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
We heard from the minister this morning that work on the draft GPS for
land transport is being done and that one will be released
soon.
So where are things at in terms of
with the agents of the ministry and work in that
space?
So, it's consistent with what the minister's just said before.
Our focus has been very much on the budget.
Ministers are
giving that effect. In terms of the GPS,
ministers are still deciding, and cabinet haven't decided yet on when a
draft will be released.
So that's the position of the GPS at this point in time.
Has work been done on a draft GPS, though?
Pretty much, yeah.
Very high level.
So just explain to me what that means.
So the high level is basically just reminding the minister again, the
context of the '24, '27 GPS. And
also there's a lot, obviously, which you'll be aware of, a number of activity
classes in the GPS.
And
just
current context or context expected for the next GPS
number of years.
What are maybe some of the choices the minister may be thinking about.
For example, he
said they've got the roads of national significance and ongoing
investment there, but there's also questions about ongoing investment in rail.
As the Infrastructure Commission has said, and the minister talked about before,
really important to be making sure you've got timely investment in your current
assets and your current roading.
So there's a number of factors that ministers have obviously
got to weigh up,
in terms of where they get to on the draft GPS, and that's just the
nature of our advice at the moment, which is very broad, very high level.
Has the minister given any direction around what he would like
to see
in the draft GPS?
Not specifically, no.
Right. So he hasn't given any direction as to what he might want to see?
I think the minister
has been clear publicly that
he obviously is mindful that the next GPS is going to have to be
developed in a
challenging environment. He's talked about that environment.
He's talked about the roads of national significance.
He's talked about the high cost of expenditure for those.
He's talked about
the fact that the Crown continues to put in additional capital
because user pays isn't covering the costs.
He's obviously wanting to know right within the revenue envelope
that he's expecting a forecast in the future, and that's been
a little bit topsy-turvy, obviously, with the fuel crisis in the Middle East.
What he's got to
play with. But he's just asked for what's effectively pretty broad
advice which we've given around, well, you
want to do roads of national significance.
You want to do asset maintenance, you want to do more on rail.
You want to do potentially more on potholes or something.
Sure, you've got to weigh those up.
And I think as the minister said too,
we've gone away from what was a
traditionally user pays one that significant capital, and I think MFE was about
40% Crown
top-up. The minister's mindful of that and going, "Well,
there's other competing priorities for that Crown capital, like hospitals.
How do I weigh that up with how much money I've got to play with for a next GPS,
and therefore what are my choices?"
So just to be clear, the minister has said that a draft GPS is
coming soon, but you're telling me that he has not given any
specific direction
to the ministry around what he would like to see in that-
The minister hasn't been specific about, I want it to go this way or that way.
But I think what he said before, and I don't want to correct the member
because I don't have the transcript in front of me, but I think the minister,
when it was soon, also might've said something quite cheekily about, well,
soon as how long's a piece of string? I'm paraphrasing a little bit.
Sure. Got you.
Yeah.
Can I ask another question just on the
capacity and capability? I know NCERT hasn't been stood up yet, but it
will in a matter of weeks.
Yeah
The transition from Ministry of Transport across to MCERT-
Yep
... is that a like for like transfer in terms of
policy advice, headcount, those sorts of things?
So,
I'll answer it this way. In terms of focus of MCERT, transport is very
much front and center.
Obviously, the benefit of MCERT is aligning transport and priorities and how do
you get bigger bang for your buck by aligning with the planning system and urban
development and environmental.
The priorities that we currently have in terms of the transport and that ministers
talked about, they will transfer.
We're not seeing any
drop off in terms of the focus of our work.
In terms of
FTE count, we've got at the moment a head count of about 186 in the
ministry. Those people transfer over to
MCERT.
Obviously, as part of
the discussions, and I think the ministers talked about this, for MCERT.
MCERT's been created to have a greater impact in our regions and cities.
Obviously, there will be expected some efficiencies out of
that process as well.
Obviously, the new CV with Jeremy Lightfoot, I think he's got a
hearing now in the environment on this particular matter.
We'll be looking at, okay, further integration, further opportunities, further
change in the new MCERT,
but I can't talk anything specifically about that.
So at this stage, the 186 FTE is a full transfer across-
It's a transfer over
... to the new entity?
Yeah. At this time. Yep.
Okay.
And the priorities and the work are continuing.
Julieanne.
I actually wanted to go
to a different topic and ask about the-
Absolutely fine. This is your primary
... the investigations about
irregularities. There's six separate roading contract
investigations currently being undertaken by either the
NZTA internally or externally.
And I think given the amount of public money
that's going into these projects, what are you
able to tell us about
how those happened?
What the scale of inappropriate spending, if any, and
how are we going to be assured that NZTA is avoiding
this in the future?
Integrity is of utmost importance to the NZTA
board and the agency. And you've mentioned, the members
mentioned, those that
relate to the delivery of infrastructure projects.
We've also had integrity issues that have been raised in the regulatory space and
driver's license, and we've had the issue with the police and breath testing, and
this is indicative of integrity challenges we're seeing
across the economy. So it's something that the board
doesn't enjoy, but in the environment we're in, is pleased
that through the speak-up channels that we have, through various
mechanisms, we are seeing people being comfortable with saying something's not
right here and looking into it.
A number of those investigations are underway, and I can't talk to the detail
because that would prejudice what's going on.
What I can assure you is that the board
treats this very seriously. We have
commissioned independent reviews and assistance with some of that.
The first starting in February and another one more recently.
We're expecting results of that to come back to us in the next few months.
To date, some of the issues that have been raised have been found to
have
no substance. Others, there are issues that have arisen that have given
us cause to adjust internal processes.
Some of it's just better communication, some of it's
making sure that our alliance partners adhere to and apply
standards it would expect as of the agency itself.
Overall, we are confident that the system is acting as it is
expected to,
but don't enjoy these issues occurring any more than anyone
else does.
Are you taking any steps to see if there are
other projects where there might be
this kind of-
As part of the work that's
underway, we look not only at the issue that has been raised, but the broader
circumstances in which
it applies, and ensuring that we take lessons from the
individual issue and assess the broader ecosystem for if there is a
repeat of that issue or if there's improvements, as I noted, that could be made.
Has it just been, do you think, that NZTA hasn't really had the
capacity to have sufficient oversight over some of
these alliance contracts?
I don't think so at all. I think some of it is, and if I
think one that is public around the Trick Alliance,
shifts in the amount that was funded and how that project shifted through
time and perceptions of that.
The processes that the team have in place and the
enhancements that they've carried out give us confidence that there
is not only the resource, but the skill and approach
to appropriately oversee them. And the one thing that gives me comfort
as a board member is the openness of the agency,
and actually some of the partners involved in these matters too, being
interrogated and answering the integrity questions we have of
them.
Will the results of internal and external
investigations currently underway be made public, and if so,
when?
I can't comment on that at this point.
Like this year?
I mean, it'd be fair enough, right?
I'm just asking, will they be made public once they're done?
I would expect that there is
some form of summary of output that is provided, but whether the exact-
I think it also-
... results of that-
Yeah, it would also depend on the findings and there's questions of natural justice
and other matters that will have to come into play before I think a consideration
would be made about what's made public and when.
Okay. So there might It might be that the public doesn't
find out about some of the results of these investigations
Well, I think
what we're saying is, it's too soon to say how this is going to play out.
NZTA have got a
number of investigations underway.
The nature of those investigations, how they proceed, will determine about
what is released in the public domain and what is not.
And when you're dealing with the seriousness of some of the issues at play,
it's only right that you play due diligence and legal process,
and that will determine what can be released publicly.
And we have indicated that one
investigation report that's underway will be released publicly, and that's the one
that's being led by KC.
Okay.
And obviously, if there's no findings that are in the interest of the public, we'll
release it.
There's a-
Last question, please.
Oh, this is a separate but related question.
The NZTA board has stopped publishing minutes of the board meetings
in the last year.
I don't think that's been a deliberate choice.
I think we're behind, I think is the actual answer, but we'll take that
feedback.
So-
I don't think there's an intention not to publish the minutes, so we'll follow up
on that.
Okay.
It's not a decision not to publish them.
Okay. It just hasn't gotten done.
Yeah, I think that's the-
They've been busy, the real issue, so
Yeah. But it's-
It's a fair point.
Okay.
Yeah.
Thanks.
I wanted to ask a few questions about the relationship with local government.
So it's actually close to 90% of our roading systems is local.
You've got a lot of focus on getting the
state highways up to spec, which is good.
Sure.
Bit of a catch-up going on there. What
level of information do you have and do you keep an eye on in
terms of the asset management by local government of its roads?
Yeah.
Look, here we have a good relationship with local government.
They're obviously extremely busy at the moment on things other than
transport, but we-- Well, yeah. Which I can't comment on.
But we definitely are connected with them on local roads.
Look, I think one of the best things that
has happened in the last couple of years is the refocus on REG,
the Road Efficiency Group, which we're members of alongside
local government, which is now doing a lot more reporting
on asset management and condition of the asset.
It's a lot more proactive. It also, like I talked about
at the earlier hearing with the minister,
has a different contract with a different vehicle, but is going around
collecting data across the local road network as well.
What is this thing called?
What was that, sorry?
What is this beast called?
I don't know what that one, that one's called.
There's a couple of other contracts because they're smaller, because the state
highway one is quite a large truck, which can't go up local roads all the time.
Whereas there's some smaller machines that can.
Just a truck.
Yeah, our one's a truck. It's got a whole lot of technology in it.
Okay, fine.
Yeah.
It's got to have a name.
Yeah. Very, it's-- They're quite impressive.
So we are collecting that data and then REG collates that and reports
on that. And I believe that's all made public.
I think that's shared publicly as well.
Any comments on, do we get ourselves in the
situation where councils cannot afford to maintain
their roading network?
Obviously, it starts going to FAR questions, but also how...
It's GPS question as well, how much money goes to maintenance.
Because if we are saying, take the Infrastructure Commission again, if we're saying
that we want to make sure we look after what we've got and the system doesn't
work to allow that,
then there's an issue there.
Go on. Is that fair?
So I'm interested in how you're seeing the funding ability, because
sometimes it's your funding that's capped.
Yeah.
Sometimes it's their funding that's capped.
Sometimes it's the balance between the two, FAR aids.
Correct.
And sometimes the emergency stuff.
Yeah, I think one GPS ago, the real issue was
our FAR cap funding was having a real impact on local government.
I think in the latest GPS, there was more money put into
local road maintenance, which meant that there was less
restrictions on our side of it. I think it's fair to acknowledge that local
government is coming under more and more pressure with their side of the
investment.
Yeah.
And it's well balanced, but I think some
parts of local government do struggle to put up their FAR
contribution to match ours when it comes to both
investment in new roads and
in renewal.
So when we look at that, and you look at some of those
councils, and it's probably particularly some of the smaller councils, the ones
with big rural networks and relatively few ratepayers.
And also we've got this thing, this big bow wave of old bridges-
Yep
... which are needing a lot of money. I can see the nodding going on.
What's the picture looking like for being able to look after these assets in
the right way? And sometimes you might say, "Well, we're going to restrict bridge,
restrict the use of bridges," whatever it might be.
But actually, an overall picture of the network of the country, because while they
own these assets, you are the
probably 50-ish percent or more funder of them, so it's
important that you've got a picture too.
Well, I think that's going to be a real challenge going forward.
Let's separate it from the state highway because it's probably slightly different
issues.
Yep. Yes. Yes.
But I think in local roads, you're going to find more and more of that, and I think
what that's going to result in is reviews of levels of service and
how those roads are maintained. That may, and I'm talking
generically here, but you could find councils decide to have more
gravel roads rather than sealed roads.
You're going to find restrictions on bridges for sure,
or different solutions, and I think that's going to become more and more common.
Ultimately, that's got to be dealt with at a system setting level where the
GPS comes in. It's about how much of
funding allocated out of the GPS will go into local road renewal.
But I think you're correct, Chair, that that is going to be a ...
growing issue.
State Highway slightly different,
but same underlying issue.
Do you have, Brad, do you have any comment from a GPS point of view?
Because I can see this is going to be a systemic challenge- I think- ...
of quite some substantial scale. Yeah, look, I think, Brett,
the last, I think, 0.3 billion road improvements, and I think, yeah-
Improvements or maintenance? Well, improve-
There would be maintenance as well wouldn't it with FAR, I think.
I can get you the number. We can double-check that. Yeah, you can get.
But, I think that the--
But Brett's right. And as the minister talked about before, within
the funding envelope we've got for future GPS, you're going to
have to make calls about where you put your dollar.
Obviously, local road improvements is important.
But
we got competing, we got aged assets across this country. Mm.
Local roads, state highway, state highway bridges,
rail,
other transport infrastructure, that all needs to be looked at.
And there's going to have to be a, to use a cricket analogy, a bit of a batting
order that will have to be worked through.
Well, I guess I'm looking at this in the context of the wider infrastructure plan.
Yeah. If we're saying that we need to maintain what we've got as
priority- I think- ... before we build new stuff, and I believe that's actually
what the public want us to do. Yeah.
Then that
might change the batting order. And that's definitely as we talked about before
with the, the Infrastructure Commission has talked about and I think the other
ministers talked about that let's focus on our
assets as they are now and our renewals and replacement.
But how much, how you spread that, because that's still a significant amount of
investment required- Mm ... as Infrastructure Commission report thoughts about how
you spread that across your different transport modes and infrastructure will be a
matter to work through. Yeah. Okay.
I think the local road maintenance investment targets for three years was
3.2 billion. Before, sorry, for the three years was 3.2
billion from the NLTF. The local road improvements was only
600 million, so that trade-off is already made in the current GPS.
But remember, of course, that a lot of new roads and local government
come from developer funding. Yeah. That doesn't take account of that. Yeah.
No, I understood that. And also worth noting, Chair, that obviously the
consecutive government, the previous government, this government, when there has
been impacted weather events- Mm ...
has put additional capital work to get those roads open as
well.
Well, and look, if I can ask two other things specifically in the local roading
area. Special purpose roads, which I've asked every time, and I will keep asking.
I'm not sure we-- I think we got to a place of going you're still thinking about
it. And it does fit, again, with councils that are going to go, if they get handed
them, are going to go, "Oh my God, what do I do with this?" And I know that one--
a couple of councils have already backed off a level of service already from having
been handed those back, a couple of Taranaki councils. Yeah.
So my question is,
NZTA's been looking after them for a while. Again, small councils.
Can't quite remember which ones they all are, but I know some of them.
Yeah, six of them. What are we going to do? We haven't made a decision yet.
So that's- Decision's still to come.
But what can we- Well, can I encourage you to keep that haven't made the decision
for the next 100 years or so?
The decision isn't being asked, the decision we have done is that we have-- We're
talking about the next NLTP period.
We have said to these councils to
provide the evidence to support us in making that decision.
The answer isn't an absolute no, they've all got to go back to 100% FAR, but we
need to look at each of them individually,
what the challenges are, what they're doing, and what their funding FAR
contribution might need to be. So we are going to consider the six
individually with proper evidence, and then we'll put it to the board.
So is this an issue of the unique situations
that each of them are? They're all unique. And yeah.
Councils are all unique based on their rating base, what the road's doing, how
important it is, what maintenance it actually need, what the level of the service
might be. And should they be 100%? Should they be
something in between normal FAR and 100%?
That's what we want to weigh up. Right. Good.
And look, the final one is just I'm going to pick a couple of Wellington projects
now, which is there's two that I know the Wellington Council's looking at at the
moment. One is the bus way down the
keys, which was part of Let's Get Wellington Moving in a time when
we thought the Wellington city was growing significantly. Yeah. It's stopped.
So I'm interested in what you're thinking about that, and the other one's the
Golden Mile. And again, the NZTA as part of
LGWM was part of that.
But it's all changed. Yeah. So- So I just wanted to find out where you're at with
both of those two. Yeah. So the Golden Mile was funded,
and to a total of 130 million, but obviously
council has decided to review what the scope is of the Golden
Mile, which they are doing. We have not had a decision yet out of council.
I don't think they've made a decision yet.
We have said that if that decision changes the scope, then they'll need to come
back to us around what that new scope is, how that aligns with the GPS.
Sounds like it has to change either the dollars or the work is done.
So- That's, I read in the paper like you the same.
So yep, that suggests that's going to come back to us and then we'll consider what
that new scope is and what our
contribution would be, if anything.
So that's still waiting, that decision.
The keys, that didn't get prioritized in this NLTP,
but I think
from a PT perspective, it definitely has benefit. We supported it.
We were part of Let's Get Wellington Moving, and we'd be keen for it to get into
the RLTP and be considered in the next NLTP period.
Okay, cool. Thanks. Okay,
other questions. Tony.
Thank you, Chair.
The 400 million for state highway resilience-
Yes
... that's been sort of-
In the budget
... in the budget.
Yep. Mm-hmm.
Can you just identify the prioritization of
those, or of that spend? And, you know-
How they were selected, really.
Yeah, sure.
Not questioning the merits of them necessarily.
No, no, I understand. How do we come up with the ones that were put there?
Yeah.
So basically, we have a tool, the GIS-based
tool, that maps the entire state highway network from
a resilience and risk perspective.
It ranks all the potential issues across that from
a critical risk through to a low risk.
So, I'm talking slips, flooding, all of those types of resilience types risks.
So, that is where we started.
And we started to-- we looked at all the high
and critical risks that are across the state highway and where they were to come
up with the list of areas that you would first focus on.
We then considered
what they would look like from a corridor perspective.
So if you can imagine, you might have a corridor, Waioeka, it might have two or
three critical, but it might have some
lower ones. You might fit a critical one, and then it still fails because one
of the lower risk ones has a problem.
So then we took a corridor approach to go, okay, if we know these are the critical
ones that we really need to fix,
let's go in and let's do it properly.
So if we're going to allocate the money, let's think about it at a corridor level.
So we fixed that corridor. So then we
basically, using that tool, identified the highest corridors
that needed investment to lift the level of service over
time. And then there was a spread across the country.
So in terms of that process of identifying what was
listed from the tool-
Yep. Yep
... was it the 400 million was the amount, and
then identifying where effectively you ruled the line-
Correct
... or what it was. So it wasn't a... Okay.
Is there an appreciation of those aspects of
the roading network then that fell short, were just below
the line?
Yeah. Yeah.
And how then have they been prioritized, if at all-
Yep
... in terms of any future work that might be undertaken?
Oh, absolutely. So it's just as you're thinking and describing it.
We had 400 million, so we went and graph went down until we used that up on the
high-risk ones. We do have other resilience money, and
we also will allow for other resilience investment just out of the
NLTF like we normally do, low cost, low risk for local roads and state
highways and other allocation of resilience money.
And that we'll just continue to look at that list and keep going down it, which
will be a different suite of projects. So that's exactly how we look at it.
So in terms of them having been now identified-
Yep
... and funded-
... what's the prioritization in terms of rolling out the delivery-
Yeah
... work?
Yeah. So it's all different. So some of them, as you mentioned, you got this tool
that's got them all identified. Some we know incredibly well.
So, take
for example, Frankton
to Kingston, which is... Oh, no, sorry, Cromwell to Frankton
actually is a good one, into Queenstown, State Highway 6.
We know that road incredibly well. It's a rockfall issue there.
We actually have done business case work on where the interventions are needed,
the type of solution. So we have a really good handle on that, so we'll be
able to identify that. We've allocated
30 million to that, and we will then go into a procurement process, either using
our existing suppliers or open market to get that work underway.
Somewhere like the Waioeka Gorge, there's a lot of sites.
We've got $75 million allocated. We'll now have to balance that to get the
best possible resilience outcome for the Waioeka because we could probably
spend 200 million or 400 million in the Waioeka Gorge
alone. But some of the corridors need a bit more work to make
sure we get best value for money and bang for buck.
Okay. In terms of that Frankton route, you know that roundabout pretty well?
The roundabout we're replacing.
I take it.
It's going to be traffic circles. I know it very well because everyone raises it
with me.
Oh, yeah.
Can I just move on to a similar area in terms of-
Oh, yeah, no, good to carry on. Yeah, yeah
... and it's the one that I talk about frequently, which is the pothole patrol.
Potholes?
This is the-
Yes
... pothole stuff. Well, what-
You're happy talking about that
... I'm very happy to talk about it because I think things can be a bit smarter in
that space.
What
is actually happening-
Yep
... to mitigate the constant repeat-
Yeah
... visits to the same potholes? We talk about this each time-
We do
... that you've come here.
Yeah.
So what-
Okay
... what's the latest?
Yeah. So
I think there's two bits to this. I'll just talk to
the repeat
thing first. So, in preparation for this, knowing you would probably
ask these questions, I did get some of the data about where we're doing these
repeat repairs and why we're doing them.
And actually, the data's really interesting because the repeat repairs are
happening, the most of them are happening in the winter months, which is what you'd
expect, more potholes, 40% of them happening in June alone.
So what's going on is that if you have a rain event,
we
want to fix them in 24 hours from a safety perspective, so we don't have a road
full of potholes. If the event's still happening within the 24
hours, we're sending crews out there, and they can't do a proper repair.
That's the long and short of it. They're saturated, the road's saturated, there's
water in there. They'll just chuck what's called cold mix in.
It's cold asphalt, biff it in the hole
and cover it up knowing that it's a temporary fix, that they are going to have to
come back and fix it at a later date because it's got
water in the system. You just can't dry it. But we want to make the road safe.
So some of the repeats are that. The other issue which
I discovered, and I didn't know last time we talked, is how
those potholes are classified. So we break the state
highway into 10-meter sections. And so if you have a bit of
section of state highway that
fails, often you'll get three or four potholes in one short area.
When it gets recorded in the system, that if you had three potholes
in 10 meters, that would come up in the data as being repeated,
fixed three times, when it's actually three individual potholes-
That have been fixed once. So there's a bit of a data piece that's playing
out there as well. So that's what's going on there.
However, the bigger question is we... I'm with you.
We don't want to be wasting money going and fixing a pothole.
So the real issue is how do we lift the quality highway?
Investment over the years, started back in '18, the realization we needed was
more making a difference. So the number of potholes that we have across our
network is reducing,
significantly. We're back from a peak of
62,000 potholes in '22, '23, down to
45,000 potholes. The real answer here
is that we need to be renewing the network in a timely manner
and fixing the underlying issue so that the potholes don't occur.
We will never get rid of every pothole all the time, but to stop that need
of repeat and wasting money on that, we need to make sure we're maintaining the
asset well.
And look, no one likes a pothole. I don't like a pothole either.
Yep.
But are you then saying that you're trying to also do things a bit
smarter in terms of-
Obviously
... the data stuff? You know, you-
Yep
... that second visit where you-
... send a crew out and identify that it's not fit for purpose to be mitigated.
They put, they sort it out.
Yep.
You don't... You only want them then to go back one more time, right?
To do it right-
Preferably, yeah
... rather than-
100%
... three, four, five, six.
Yes. And we've actually used-
Because that's what the data does show, that there are some potholes-
Yep
... that have been filled six times.
Yep, and they'll be double ups of potholes, but they'll also be potholes in the
middle of winter where a road is well beyond its use by date, should have been
renewed, hasn't been, and we're hanging onto it to summer because we
can't do it in winter.
Okay.
And so then you're getting repeat.
We've also changed the technology, which people won't know, but
cold mix was often a way to do it, chuck cold asphalt in. We now use these patches.
Right.
So we put asphalt in and then we put these...
You'll see they're square patches over the potholes now.
It's like a sticker, ba- like a Band-Aid basically.
They last a lot longer. They're more enduring.
So we're constantly pushing the technology in this sense.
I think-
Shall we sup?
Yeah, we'll take a sup there just, but I've just got to say, I think you're looking
for some savings somewhere to fund something else, aren't you?
Oh.
I leave people to form their own views on that.
We only want to invest the least amount of money fixing potholes.
I'm aligned-
Fair to say.
I'm aligned with that.
Look, it would be useful though for your providers of one fix, two, three time fix.
Not all three time fix. Maybe three times it might be three potholes, so yeah.
Savings.
But just thinking about how you improve the durability of the roads that
are renewed,
what are the technologies or systems that NZTA has
been using, say, on some of the projects like State Highway 1, Waiouru to
provide a bit more resilience and durability?
Yeah. No, it's a good question. We've
completely changed the way we're thinking about how those
renewals are done now. So,
in the case of State Highway 1, we can talk about how we did it, which was through
closures. But actually, we realized there that the traffic volumes and heavy
vehicles have increased significantly.
Your traditional what's described as a flexible pavement is no longer fit for
purpose, which is just layers of aggregate that's compacted and then you put
a chip seal over the top to seal it. So we've gone overseas.
We're now
using a technology there, which is called foamed bitumen.
I won't go into the technicalities of it.
Oh, go on.
But it's-
Go on.
But it's
But basically, it's a lot more robust pavement.
It's stronger, it's more rigid and will last longer.
It's been heavily used in Queensland and Australia
to great success and also in South Africa.
So that's the sort of things we're doing, putting down a lot more robust longer
term pavement on our high risk corridors.
On our lower risk corridors, we'll still continue to do what's fit for
purpose. The other thing that's happened is we've had, well known, we've had some
failures on some of our earlier wrongs from eight.
Cambridge, and we're fixing it. And we've totally changed around how we do it now.
So we have what's called client specified pavements.
So we are designing the pavements. We set the criteria of what we want.
Most of them are called deep lift asphalt, so they're layers of asphalt, very
rigid so that we don't have these premature failures
that cost us a lot of money to fix any longer.
Right. Thank you.
That was very interesting. Thank you for that.
Okay,
other questions?
Sup- primary.
Simon's primary. Yeah. No, hang on.
Did I have any other primaries over here as well?
I've just had one.
Okay, great. Simon, away you go. Yeah, okay. And then I've got some. I've got one.
Look, I think this has been raised at this committee
before, potentially other hearings, about the age of many
of the bridge structures on the state highway network, particularly on local roads
as well. Many of these bridges fell to Ministry of Works designs
and standards back in the '60s and '70s.
I understand particularly there's over 100 which may need
renewal or replacement at some stage.
Yep.
What plans does NZTA have to standardize
the delivery of these replacements or renewals?
And
how might that be procured so that the taxpayer can get better value for money?
Yeah.
Can you correct his number because I suspect it's more like 10
thousands rather than 100.
Yeah. So I've lost my sheet, but anyway, I'll have to do it
from my head-
... I want to get the numbers exactly right. But yeah, look, you're 100% right.
You know this, that we have an aging bridge,
set of bridges because they were built
back in the '50s and '60s and coming to the end of their
usable life. This NLTP period, we're replacing
22 bridges at value of about 110 million, completely end of
life. Next NLTP period, we think we've got about
22 bridges to replace. That would be about 3 to 400 million, and there's
some pretty large bridges coming in the future, especially in the South Island.
And then that just continues to grow. There's a couple of things we do.
One, we want to stretch the life of those end of life bridges, so we balance the
bow wave. There's technologies you can use to do that, carbon
strengthening, fiber and carbon strengthening, and other things.
Deloading them, weight restrictions and other things to To get the bow
wave out.
But then we want to working at ice. More than just ice.
We're thinking of modular construction or that sets itself for that.
Often not a lot of things in horizontal construction do, but this is one
where, how could we come up with two bridge designs and actually have that
product available, manufactured that we can grab
and use in a really fast and efficient way.
So we've got some work going on that Kevin's leading, looking at
that, looking overseas, looking at what's been done in the UK, because they've done
some of this, and thinking about how we can apply it here.
So that's exactly what we're considering.
Excellent. Thank you.
Can I just ask on bridges,
that those bridges, the numbers of bridges you were talking about there are state
highway bridges?
Yeah. I'm talking of state highway bridges.
Okay.
Yeah.
So if we look across the local roading network, I think Huranui told me they had
160 odd that they were looking at, that's just one council.
Yeah, and when-
It's quite a large number, isn't it?
Yeah, it will be a large number. So and the difference in number why I say
is end of life bridges, the definition will be slight-- You've got to be careful
what people are saying.
Yeah, I know.
So end of life is meaning that it is completely end of life.
It can't take anything more, and it's got to be replaced.
There's a bridge that's aging and getting to end of life, which is a different-
Mm.
Yeah. No, I understand. They might be able to fix it.
Yeah.
There we go. Okay.
Tanya, you had a primary?
I did. A new one. Yes.
Primary.
This is about total mobility
scheme.
So from the 1st of July this year, the
subsidy will drop, and the fare caps will fall
by a little bit.
Has there been any analysis in dollar terms around how much
someone who utilizes that scheme or that service will have to pay
extra per trip?
Yeah. I'll get Ruth to come up.
Is that sure?
We'll have to come back on that.
We'll come back to you.
On that particular one.
Yeah.
Okay. But just got a few questions, and it might be that you-
I can-
Are in a position to be able to answer, which is fine.
The other is just in terms of the total forecast saving to the Crown by
cutting the contribution.
So the,
reducing the contribution was...
So the forecast unmet need, I guess, the forecast shortfall is
255 million. And so any savings that are going to be made through
the reduction in the Crown contribution will go back
into meeting that shortfall. So it's just been, so there's a shortfall over five
years. And so it's not like the funding not going into the total mobility scheme,
it's going to be spread over the next five years to meet the forecast shortfall.
Okay. In terms of advice provided to the minister
around this, was any specific advice provided on whether
cutting the subsidy from the Crown was consistent with
obligations that we might have, for example, under the UN Convention on the Rights
of Persons with Disabilities?
I think that's something that we looked at, and I can come back to you specifically
on that point.
Okay. Very good. And in terms of the wider review of the TM scheme,
where are things at? When will information be in the public arena?
Yes. So we're in the process of, we'll be briefing the minister very soon about
that. So in terms of soon, very soon.
It's a common word.
That's clear. That's quick.
But imminently, and then minister's back about side to do and then those types of-
In terms of the consultation process previously, which does impact on the decisions
taken for this budget,
can you give an answer as to why public
consultation with the community was excluded, particularly around the fare cap and
subsidy side of things? Thank you.
So the, we
sorry, sir, excuse me. We, just for the
change on the
subsidy side, as you say, we didn't consult publicly on that one,
but we have consulted publicly since on some other changes.
Okay. For the former, why was there no consultation taken?
Because we were, we needed to give advice in terms of timing for the budget as
well.
Sorry, you were-
Time, there was timing issues with the budget.
Right.
And also,
yeah, decision was just made to give advice ourselves on that one.
By who?
Well, I
can check back whether we discussed that with ministers or not, but we certainly
considered that ourselves.
Okay. So you're not a, you can't answer for me whether there was ministerial
direction around the shortcut process of
cutting out members of the community having a say on what is a fundamental-
I wouldn't describe that as-
... issue
... I wouldn't describe it as a shortcut.
There would've been timing issues taken into account, but I can come back to you
about whether there was a minister direction or not.
Okay, thanks.
Julianne.
Can I just... Sorry. Can I just come back to the proactive
publication of the NZTA board minutes?
Because I have just seen an internal paper
that was released under the OIA that was dated
17/12/2024, where one of the
actions sought is to endorse the proposed approach to cease proactive
publication of the board minutes.
So,
I mean, it seems like there was an internal decision by the ELT
to cease publishing board minutes and to leave it to
people requesting under the OIA. Is that really a more efficient approach?
Wouldn't it just be more efficient...
I mean,
given what you said earlier,
could you commit to proactively publishing the board minutes?
In absence of the chair, I wouldn't undertake to make that
change. But look, I think one of the key things-
It seems like it was an ELT decision, not a board decision
... one of the key things that we do release, which I think is of importance to
the public, is the results of funding decisions.
As someone who reads a lot of board packs,
board minutes
have a variety of things in them. But I think in terms of public accountability,
that the matters that are most important in terms of how we're spending our
money are released.
We can take it back and have a think about whether our approach is
appropriate in 2026.
What I'm hearing from that is, Julianne, is you said that you're saying there
was a conscious decision made Not to continue proactively
releasing them.
I think-
That's slightly different from what-
I think we need to follow up and come back.
I think if you put that in writing.
We can come back on that.
It's an ELT... There was a paper that went to the
ELT in December
2024 that recommended ceasing
proactive publication of the board minutes, and noting that board minutes will
still be available under the provisions in the OIA if requested.
I don't recall that, but let's come back and get-
Okay. I think that's something-
... some details as to what's happened.
And then I hear the members' desire for them to be-
Yeah
... openly published.
I think we like-
Sorry
... open transparency.
I incorrectly responded before.
Fair enough.
It wasn't across the paper.
Can I just ask some questions around,
I don't see other questions at the moment, but the road user charges
process. Obviously we're not at that stage yet, but thinking around that.
Probably the biggest concern that I've heard from people, and in this sense I'm
almost asking for a friend,
privacy issues and concerns around privacy issues and who
holds data and how that data is used and so on.
Has any thought been given, it's probably a ministry question.
Has any thought been given to that
effect?
Yeah, I'll bring up Paul
O'Connell
to talk a little about it.
Yeah, so that's something that will be worked through once the bill is
passed and the standards, the detailed requirements for RUC
provider, the developer, through a secondary piece.
Sorry, didn't hear that last bit, I'm sorry.
Sorry. So when-
Sorry
... when the bill's passed and then comes into effect six months later, I
understand that NZTA will be working through their detailed guidance for the RUC
providers as they are as RUC collectors and privacy-
Yes
... will be front and center on that.
Yeah.
Some of this depends, of course, on which providers come forward to be RUC
providers.
Yeah.
And quite a lot of water to go under the bridge there.
Yeah, I think the question is, well, maybe it is a question for both of you then,
is that concern around privacy, around the
ability for people who holds the information, but also what can that information
be? What will that information tell people about where have I been,
when have I been, whatever. That sort of stuff.
It's the sort of thing I think people feel a bit nervous.
Not everybody trusts government agencies, funnily enough. I don't know why.
Yeah.
Look, I can
say that privacy is very much front and center.
It's front and center.
You've got the road user charges and the schemes that will come in play
eventually, and obviously the providers.
But
it's front and center now, even discussions,
I have with Brett and with the board, as direction from the Public
Services Commission, integrity of individuals'
data is
front and center.
I have written on behalf of the
direction of the Public Services Commissioner to the board to seek assurances
around measures they have put in place now.
If you take the motor vehicle registry, for example, and there's road
user registry already, collection of information,
for confidence about protection measures, implementation
measures, upgrades.
That is something that is regularly discussed at the board level.
We monitor,
and we continue to seek assurances.
I think
we're very mindful that
with all the ways that we collect revenue at the moment, it comes down to
information around individuals and the integrity of the system is absolutely
paramount, particularly as the minister's talked about.
We
want to move towards
new revenue models and user pays for the
roading network. If we're going to do that, we have to maintain the
integrity of the systems and privacy.
And I know in terms of the
working group that we've got, expert working group, helping us with the road
user charging work, that is very much front of mind for them as well.
Is the Privacy Commissioner involved in this conversation?
The privacy-- There's ongoing discussions with the Privacy Commissioner
as we implement things and checking things.
But I can definitely... I'm very
clear as the CE about my responsibilities from the Public
Services Commissioner in this space, and so does the board-
Mm-hmm
... of NZTA.
So who will end up, to the extent data is held,
and for however long data needs to be held, so how long does data need to be held
in this kind of arrangement and
who holds it? And how can it be accessed to a degree?
Because from a road user charger point of view,
all you really need to know is how much distance
has vehicle A, B, or C traveled, potentially
on a special road or whatever it might be, that it's a
toll road or whatever.
But how long is data held for and how is it-
So I think the finer details of that are yet to be worked through, and perhaps it's
best if we come back to you in writing with the-
Yeah. There'll be details-
...
details of our work.
Yep. And look, if I can ask the other area of concern that I've heard is around the
licensing system. You talked about the licensing system having been
made some changes to the... I'm not here talking about the vehicle licensing
system, but the human licensing system. There's been some changes made there.
The way in which... So we are allowing for
digital licenses as an option as opposed to not.
The existing physical licenses, do they stay as just a photo license,
or is it some sort of different photo arrangement?
I've heard people concerned about biometric
photos or whatever those are.
No, I don't think there's any intention to move to biometric.
No change.
No.
No change. Okay.
Just to enable for a digital provision instead of having to have a physical card.
So, okay. That's cool. Right.
Sup on this.
Sup on that one, and then I'll go to Tracy.
I think at the last meeting, I also raised a question about the digital
licensing. When our healthcare workers, how to
access to the information about donation, the organ donation.
Have you guys resolved that part of the problem yet?
I'm not aware of that. We can come back to you on that.
Yes.
Sorry. Yeah. I don't have that information.
Yeah, because on the hard copy, basically, there's
information whether they are donor or not.
But for digital licensing, we just don't know how those healthcare workers can
access that information.
Right. Oh, okay.
Oh, okay.
Yeah. Well, I don't have the answer off the top of my head.
I think if we-
But I think they'll come back with it
... the form of the digital license has been designed here, so.
Sure. Thank you.
We'll come back. Yeah. Tracy.
Thank you. The budget '26, there was
some public transport fuel cost support
for cost pressures due to the conflict in the
Middle East, et cetera, et cetera.
Mm-hmm.
Which is coming from reprioritizations, underspends,
and the decarbonization,
and also the older driver's license holder subsidy.
So I suppose my question is, does this signal a bit of a change in the
government's commitment to decarbonizing public
transport
fleet? And,
have you got any thoughts on how that affects our emissions targets
or...
So I think
what you're referring to
is... Sorry, just check my notes.
Does, does-
There's the public, yeah, so public transport bus decarbonization.
Yeah.
The figures are withheld, but there's the public transport
fuel cost support in budget 2026,
which-
Yep
... clearly comes from that,
by
looking at the decarbonization and the older adults'
driver's license subsidy,
and has reprioritized money into this
time-limited
support.
Support, yeah. So
in terms of the public transport bus decarbonization,
that fund was actually discontinued in budget '25.
And what simply happened is unspent money in budget, so
last year's budget, unspent funding therefore for '25/'26,
has been reprioritized. But that was actually reprioritized.
You're talking to stewardship of underground assets-
Mm
... infrastructure and corridors.
The
older driver's license subsidy,
in terms of why that's been... In terms of the difference
there.
That was purely based on lower than expected demand as
well.
Okay.
But what ultimately, going back to the
point of the additional fuel cost support, particularly for '25/'26 of
the 5.5-
More the decarbonization support.
More the de- yeah. So the decarbonization, it was stopped in budget '26.
Mm.
The government made a decision then, and we're all we've, basically done
is use the unallocated funds to put towards other priorities.
And nothing has risen in between times to lead you to believe that that
wasn't-
No. Not that I'm aware of
... the continuation, the decarbonization of that was a wrong
call?
No.
There's been nothing to suggest via the budget 2026 process
that that's going to be reinstated as any kind of-
Not that I'm aware of. Yeah.
Yeah.
Thank you. As I said, I don't intend to go through all of the
ROMs, but I do have questions. But that's on the proviso that
the level of detail of my questions will be answered through the written stuff
that's...
Mm-hmm.
Yeah.
Okay. Cool. But I have a sort of overarching question, which is,
which of the ROMs, if any, have had
any approaches to or involvement of any foreign investors for
any aspect of a ROM?
You mean an unsolicited bid?
Either or.
So the unsolicited bid process is run by NIFCo.
I can't think of any across the top of my head that have had
that. Have you got any that directly that we've dealt with?
Not directly. We've fought them into the-
But we haven't had any other approaches directly on. Yeah.
So none.
No. We'll follow up just to make sure I'm-
Okay
... I'm not misleading you. But I'm not across any
that's happening any point at the moment or in the past.
Thank you.
Outside the NIFCo unsolicited bid process, which there could well be some in there.
Thanks.
Mr. Chair.
Sorry.
Can we just clarify,
Brett, by unsolicited bid, are you referring to NIFCo's market-led
proposals process?
Yes. Sorry. Yeah.
Okay.
It's called that. Yeah.
Great.
Yep. That's what I mean.
Yep.
Unsolicited bids that we're kind of looking for. So.
Okay.
Market lead, it's called.
Yeah.
It's got a new name now. Sorry, I'm on old world terms.
Oh, fair enough. Fair enough.
Can I ask you a little bit about
the contracting arrangements? So can you just...
I think we heard earlier that you're doing this 20% each year sort of.
Can you just walk us through what you're doing?
And also, we've asked questions before and you said, "Yeah, we're going down the
process of getting some of the tier two and three contractors able to be head
contractors and so on."
Yep.
So it'd be good to just
understand a little bit more clearly what that process is that you're doing.
Yeah.
How it's delivering value for money.
And I heard the bit about outcomes as opposed to essentially piece work, is it
effectively-
Yeah
... that you're doing?
And how the tier twos and threes are stepping up as well would be good to
know.
Yeah, cool.
So there's two bits to this. There's maintenance and then there's capital.
So maintenance is where we've made the big change.
This is what we call the IDM contracts, which has
re-tendered the entire-
Sorry, the what of contracts?
They're called IDM contracts.
IDM.
But-
Integrated delivery
... yeah, integrated delivery
management, I think it is. But-
Well, it's good that you know what the acronyms is, because we don't
Yeah. So there you go. So,
basically the big changes out of there are a couple of things.
One is the one I referred to this morning, is that we're bringing a lot more of the
asset management back in-house. Rather than outsourcing that to the supply
chain, which we did through our old contracts, we're going to own more of the
long-term asset management rather than just setting outcomes.
And then it's a lot more of a direct contracting arrangement.
So less what we call lump sums, where you pay a big sum and they
fulfill a whole lot of activities, a lot more directed.
We're only going to pay X, Y, and Z, and we'll direct you to do X, Y, and Z.
So that sort of does the basic maintenance that you expect, and
then we have the renewals and reseal program, and that's the piece where we've
said, "Look, we'll give you a portion of that to deliver in your contract area.
But a portion of that we're going to make contestable every year so that we can
bring other suppliers in." They were often suppliers that were working
through the NOCs. And as subcontractors, we are
now changing the arrangement so that those tier twos and threes will work directly
for us. So we will contract them directly.
We started it last summer and had really good success.
We did quite a bit of it in Northland, think we might have done a bit in
Taranaki as well, and we're getting good competitive prices
and really good performance from that local supply chain.
On the capital side, we're constantly looking at our models.
And I think what we're doing there and from a
real view of the board as well is to have a broader
spread of models that we can see from
D&C per measure and lump sum contracts.
And also looking at how we can separate contracts so they are
smaller. So there's a good mix of sometimes you have to do big contracts, but
where we can, doing smaller
packages. The resilience work we've talked about before is a really good
example of that, where I would really hope that a lot of that stuff will be
done directly by smaller contractors with direct relationships with us,
rather than through bigger tier one contractors.
So we're
really conscious in how we're procuring.
And so just in terms of the tier twos and threes- Mm ...
you've given us Northland and Taranaki stepping up.
Is this something that you are seeing or you're hoping to see across the country,
that there are these sort of smaller contractors? Yep.
Because in terms of the big contractors, do we kind of get down to Fultons and
Downers and
how many major contractors do we actually really end up with?
In tier ones in New Zealand? Tier ones. Yeah. So we've got Fulton Hogan, Downer.
You've got the Vinci group now that owns Hereberd Fletcher's- Yeah ...
that are obviously a big group. You've got CPB Contractors, although they are no
longer doing really any work for us.
And then you've got Asiana are probably the other big player.
But these
levels of contractor are there, whereas Fulton Hogan are what
you'd say as an integrated contractor.
So they provide services right down including,
right down to the workforce, whereas an Asiana is more of a head contractor
arrangement where they're operating- Yeah ...
at an oversight level and then using the local supply chain to do the delivery.
Talk more about that.
Yeah. So long term, and then I'll go to Carlos as a sub.
So long term, building a bigger, more competitive market should
be in both NZTAs but also local government's best interest
to do that. Because the big players- Yeah.
And you've got to have a mix, and I think that's what we're trying to mix up
more.
You take Cambridge to Paerata,
the offline section's going to be a D&C. It's going to be of significant value.
Hundreds of millions of dollars. Small players cannot do that.
You need a big balance sheet, and we're going to need big head contractors.
But
renewal work in the summer season, packages that are under a million or two or
three million, local supply chain can do that.
Sometimes that supply chain
is more than happy to work through a tier one because tier one have a lot of the
good systems, health and safety and management systems.
Some more directly for-- So that depends on tier twos and sometimes they directly
to us.
We've got some other requirements they might not want to have that a
tier one covers them for. So there's always a mix.
Carlos?
Yes. Let's talk about the competition thing.
How can we encourage new player or local player or company to
actually
end up before those contract?
It's just mixing up the models, exactly what I've said.
Just making sure we have smaller packages to big packages.
We're putting as much out to the market as possible.
Different model forms, D&C, design construct versus lump sum versus
measure value. Just making sure we have a real spread of different
types of contracting models and size and scale so that gives the
full spectrum the ability to-
To custom
... to work with us.
So the reason why I ask this question is the feedback I get from the field is a lot
of new company or small player, it's very hard to get contract from
government or even from NZTA, and they don't even know how or
there's a lot of restriction or red tape for them to register.
Or how are you response to it?
I'll let Brett answer individually at NZTA level.
But I think it's a really good point you're covering, which is just, and it's
general across all infrastructure, roading, housing, whatever, is how do you get
the continuity of investment intentions going.
The minister talked about it earlier on in relation to the GPS and trying to
avoid the wild swings of investment through GPS to GPS.
And ultimately what it is, is about being very clear about our strategic
intentions over a number of years, what we're going to invest in,
and making sure we avoid those wild swings and we actually give some
continuity and consistency to the market.
If you get that in play, then there's no doubt that you'll see new
entrants come into the market because they can see a market which they can play in,
and they can worry that risk. That is some challenge that is one
with priority in the transport area.
If we get more consistency there, I'm of the opinion that we will get
growth in our existing capability, but also new entrants into the market.
But Brett, you can talk specifically. Yeah.
And then at a granular level there, you're talking about pre-qualification.
So that's where you can bid for our contracts.
So I can't talk to the other infrastructure providers in the Crown, but from our
perspective, we do have layers of pre-qualification depending on the type of
work you want to do. And it's a fair feedback and we have to continue to
look at ways to make that easy for- Smaller contractors to
get pre-qualification with us so they can bid in on our work.
The work we're doing in the maintenance space and the IDMs and
putting more market out contestable will allow us to do that, which we
haven't done in the past.
Julianne, did you have a question?
Hey, I wanted to come back-
Simon, do you have one too?
No.
Okay. Julianne.
I wanted to come back to some questions that Hangi
was asking earlier about the RONS and Warkworth to Te
Hana.
You mentioned, Brett, that north of Te Hana,
the later stages, maybe two plus one roads were being considered
as an option.
Yeah.
But not Warkworth to Te Hana, and I'm just wondering why
is that?
So we looked at it for
Warkworth to Te Hana and
the decision was made due to the topography, the future growth of
traffic,
and the demands on that road going forward that
it made more sense to build it as a four-lane road from day one rather than a two
plus one that was expanded in at a future date.
So that decision was put into the business case, and that's how that was
made. And in time, that investment case will be made public.
But the
traffic volumes, AADT, are nowhere near 20,000
vehicles per day.
No, not yet. But you got to look at the growth and then
potentially what--
like I said before, about potentially what the topography is.
So in the case of this particular road, the
topography is reasonably
steep, so you end up with crawler lanes anyway.
So then you've got sections that have got four lanes regardless.
How much do you leave the bits in between? Do you create a merge there? Do you not?
What's the
road going to be like into the future? What the traffic volumes will be?
So all of those things have to get weighed up, and the
decision was made to stick with a four-lane road in this regard.
And now that you're proceeding to procurement, there's no ability
for the government to
reassess whether we could achieve the same objectives at
lower cost.
All we can say is this is in the final throes of
procurement, and the government will make the final decision
to award the contract. That's not the decision of the board, and
it will go to them in due course.
Do you think like-- do you have any comment, Cassandra, on
the enormous financial commitment of future New
Zealanders being made here for a project that carries
less than 0.2% of daily vehicle trips?
One of the challenges you have when you sit around the NZTA board table
is we have a national port system
construct over time as problems would show at a time.
And where we see our growth happening now as a
country,
we see that there are places that are going to require more roading
infrastructure, whether that be public transport, whether that be
freight, whether that be light vehicle, and how that shifts into places
where there's not existing significant infrastructure at
present. That is a challenge. And we've talked about,
Waitematā Crossing, we've talked about previously in this committee,
Transmission Gully.
Big roading projects cost money, and
we are always as a board, mindful of the
restrictions of the NLTF. We're very aware
of the restrictions and the challenges it poses to us as
an organization through Crown grants and loans.
And
we constantly ask ourselves about investment and where it
best sits in the system.
Any decision that any of us make in relation
to long-term infrastructure impacts
future years, and it's a responsibility of weighing that up that sits
with us,
not lightly, but it is the role that we're required to do.
So even if-- so it's like 15,000 vehicles per day,
and there's probably eight or nine million vehicle
trips per day in New Zealand. Even if it there was
increased tenfold,
more than 99% of vehicle trips, daily vehicle trips would
not be affected by this project. And yet, if
we look at the anticipated cost
over the 20-year payback period, it could consume
most of the available
funding for
new projects. Does that make sense?
Because you say, well, there's growth, but it's still a tiny percentage of daily
vehicle trips.
Yeah. Well, there's a few things here.
Probably get into a debate, but this project's not
just about growth of traffic. There's a resilience and safety issue, and we did
look at lower cost options, and we've done a lot of work.
In fact, actually, when you were in government, we worked on the Dome Valley
improvements at that time. They've kind of come to the end of their
use as far as
from a resilience and safety perspective. We looked at online upgrades.
We looked at offline upgrades. It was decided it was better to do an offline
upgrade in this regard. Then it was looked at two plus one and four.
So there's more broader benefits than just the traffic volumes,
the issues through connection and onto stiffer parts of that corridor.
The PPP model, what it does do, it links the cost of capital
to the delivery and the performance of the project.
And when you're talking about other investments, that often isn't part of the
conversation because the cost of capital may be borrowed elsewhere, but it's not
attached to the performance of the asset.
So you're not comparing apples with apples.
But it has been looked at from a public
sector perspective. It's got, as you know, you have to do the
business case around is it cheaper to do it?
Can you account for the extra cost of the capital and get the asset
performance? And this went through that process, and the decision was made to do it
as a PPP.
And work with Te Tai Hana obviously isn't going to address the resilience issues in
the Birdlin's
It doesn't need to.
So-
It deals with the dime. It obviously deals with the dime and up to Tai
Hana. There's a resilience issue at Tai Hana as well.
How are we going to pay for resilience issues in the
many thousands of kilometers of road network that are not affected by this
project?
It's like we were talking about before, it's not going to be
four-lane roads everywhere. So we've got 400 million that we're putting in
investment in resilience out of the budget in a whole lot of corridors
that is going to make a real difference to Owaka down into the South Island.
The Birdlin's, we spent $140 million to buy us more time.
We've got more resilience in that corridor for the foreseeable future, but it's
not enduring. It will need something done in the future.
So,
yeah, every resilience issue has to be looked at and thought about
on its own merit.
Okay. Tracy.
Thank you. Just want to go back to, well, what's
raised in this particular hearing,
increasing speed limits. So obviously, the government made a
decision to increase speed limits.
At the time, there was quite a bit of commentary about
the belief that the increase in productivity was worth
or justified any potential sort of safety risks.
So is there any plans or does budget 2026 afford
the opportunity now to do that post implementation evaluation?
Evaluation of the performance from the-
Evaluation of-
... increased speed limit?
Yeah.
Yeah, I think the Director of Land Transport has committed to do a
review in due course, but the sample's too small at
this point in time. So that will be done. I think the director did commit to that.
So-
Do you have anything to make about how long we wait for the sample
to-
Come up to the table.
Well, it's not... I mean, that's arguable.
And look, sorry, could you identify yourself too, just for the record? Sorry.
Mike Hargreaves, Director of Land Transport.
Thanks, Mike.
So at the moment, that work is ongoing.
So our indication was that that would have to have at
least 12 months of data-
Mm
... before you could start looking at that.
And obviously the more data that you have, the more robust that that data becomes
in terms of making those findings.
So certainly something that I'm very interested in, as was the previous director.
Right. Because it certainly, again, at the time
of road safety experts that raised concerns,
and predicted that there would be an increase in crashes and injuries.
So at the moment, in lieu of doing that post-implementation
work, there's no current evidence that you're relying on to say that they were
wrong and that it isn't?
No, but there's obviously the broader evaluation and monitoring that go on around
serious injuries across the road network
day in, day out. So-
Was there anything in budget 2026 that was specific or was this just-
No. Not through the budget
... basic, basically a view in terms of-
Yeah
... evaluating post implementations.
And I think, I mean, obviously there's ongoing work around
understanding the impact of
speed and I think it's interesting with the
serious injuries in 2025 at 2421,
down from 2466. I mean, obviously some of that is still preliminary
question analysis. Data takes a while to flow through.
At a very high level,
there's nothing to indicate one way or another.
There'll be different pictures on-
We need to do the detailed work.
Yeah.
But I think it's fair to say that there's a lot of work though
being done
across MOT and NZTA around
safer roads and you take the resilience work announced obviously at
budget,
safer drivers, and there's a lot of changes we've made around the driver
licensing scheme there and around safer vehicles,
as well. So it's always a multifaceted approach around this as well.
Yeah. Just trying to think back to what the advice was at the time, though.
I mean, certainly the advice at the time from MOT
wouldn't have been hugely in favor of increasing
speed limits. I think there was certainly contrary advice.
Looking behind there.
I did say that-
Come back up to the front.
Yeah. I'm trying to remember our actual words on the regulatory impact statement,
but we did say that where speeds increase, that would
increase the risk of there being more serious death and serious
injuries.
So I assume that that's quite a priority
now for
leading this work.
Yeah. It's quite a priority for the independent-
Yeah
... director to be doing that work.
Did you give us a timeline of that? Sorry, I was just-
So I think the indication was an initial evaluation after,
so from July this year, 12 months after that.
So as I say, that work is...
And the more, the longer you go, the more robust those findings become.
Mm.
And for a matter of this nature, obviously we want robust findings.
And there are obviously some academics have started making their
own-
Yes
... theory that you're up to date with.
I saw that Colin 哈 工 作 work, he himself was referring to Tim Welch's
work.
Mm-hmm.
Yeah. As he himself said, it was a little bit too early to say-
Mm. Mm
... either way.
Mm. But given the
consequences and the nature of the decision making
around it,
you'd be wanting to do that sooner rather than later.
Mm.
Yeah. Thank you.
I'll just look for other questions before I go and monopolize a few.
Well, I'm going to get a couple and then I'll give you one, Tangi.
All right.
Just a couple of very quick ones, firstly from me, and then a couple of longer
ones, but I'll try. The first one, Bailey bridges, which we talked about last time.
You were going to get some more of them, and you were going to try and relocate
them or locate them so that they
might be more accessible to the good folks of the east and the west coast in
particular. What have you done?
We've got more of them. Yep, we've got a whole lot of new ones from the States,
which are now landed and in use. We reviewed location.
We're comfortable that having Hawks Bay and Canterbury as two locations
is suitable for managing that-
I'll send you or I'll ask you to go to the west coast-
... the risk
... and talk to them. Maybe to Gisborne as well.
Okay.
The second question I wanted to ask is, in front of this committee, we still have
an open inquiry on a small road
junction on State Highway 2 and Wright's Road, Wright Road.
Well, first question is, are you going to change what you're doing,
and do something about fixing the problem that will satisfy the good folks
of that area? And secondly, the lessons learned because the
consultation, this is not one that's covered NZTA with glory, it would be
fair to say, and I don't think you've actually even gone back to them finally.
So-
So what's gone on?
NZTA has talked about this matter with this committee over a number of years.
Yeah, I know. That's why we-
But-
But we haven't concluded it yet because we haven't-
And look, I-
... really had anything back.
I think 2014, this first started an
assessment and, as
the NZTA chair spoke to this committee last year,
having a median barrier in
and not removing it is very different to not putting
one there to start with. The
barriers are in place. The board has made a decision that they will remain in
place.
We have extensively engaged with that community and with local government
and with the police through the period since 2014.
I think the most recent was December last year.
There was a discussion between the agency and that community
representatives. There were a number of actions that came out of that meeting.
All of those actions by the agency have been delivered.
It is a
matter of
importance to that community, but we have undertaken as an
agency to engage. We have done that.
We have delivered on the things that we said we would do.
And we have
an investment in that corridor, reduced
the deaths and serious injuries, which were happening at an average of 10 per year
over-
So you have engaged after the last time we-
Yes
... had a-- Okay. That's the bit we haven't got.
Yes. Re-engaged. Yes.
Re-engaged. That's good. I think if we could get some detail on that because that
will help us to conclude that-
Oh, okay
... conclude that-
Yeah
... piece of work. And the other... Sorry.
Sorry. In terms of lessons learned-
Yeah, yes
... the CE has made some changes to the structure of the organization as
it relates to local government and constantly looking at
how projects, large and small, are delivered in consultation with the
board. That's how do we ensure we don't have that feeling the way Pete's
felt for some-
Good.
The other
I think still open inquiry that we've got in front of us is from the past wide, the
state of the horses, et cetera, people, which I think is probably more an MOT
question.
And I think you would-- There's been some rule changes, et cetera.
Have those picked up the issues which were raised about vulnerable road users in
this case, and recognition that the equestrians exist?
So, no, we're not proposing any change to the vulnerable road user as the
requested by the petitioners.
And are the--
We are in the process of the
1.5 minimum passing distance. I'll get to you back on that.
But that is a change that's a material change.
Yeah, the 1.5 minimum.
So at the moment, we have no-
There's no
... there's no requirement to so you can pass that close-
Yeah
... as opposed to you've got to get 1.5.
So that is a difference-
Yeah
... which is why that's material. Does anything about speed in that situation with
you passing a cyclist or passing a pedestrian or passing a horse?
There are already requirements in the road code to pass safely at an
appropriate speed.
Yeah.
It's just it's not specific.
Okay. That's helpful.
And I will ask one more, which is temporary traffic management, which has also been
in front of us quite frequently.
Yeah.
How's the rollout of the new
guide going? What sort of savings are we seeing?
I've heard mixed
results, and there's still a hell of a lot of traffic cones out-
Mixed-
Probably justifiably, but-
Yeah. I think from our-- I'll talk from our perspective, state highway,
we think it's going well. But I would say that in the context that temporary
traffic management remains a critical risk for our organization.
So we have been focused on ensuring the safety of our workers as well as the
safety of the driving public.
Yep.
And we are still having issues at our temporary traffic management
sites.
From a savings perspective, we are
definitely seeing some benefits there, and
there is significantly less cones on the roads,
and we're using different treatments.
And the savings are, I think last year, as a
total of our investment, we were spending 5.9% on
temporary traffic management. This year, it's down to 5.3.
So we've made significant savings.
However, that under the context of we still need to keep our workers
and the members of the public safe, and that's an ongoing challenge for us-
We're always going to-
... and a very big focus, I can assure you, of the board on management.
Understandable. We look for optimal result both ways.
Yep.
Yep. Cool. Thank you.
Thank you.
The budget has $12.2 million baseline savings
associated across the entire vote-
Mm-hmm
... in transport, associated with kind of
AI approaches. So across the two
organizations,
is that involving any reduction in staff numbers?
I'm not talking about the transfer across to MCIP.
Mm-hmm.
Just in terms of baseline savings and AI.
No. So it's not
directly linked to AI. So 12.2 that you're talking
about
relates to
savings around improving resilience of the roading network.
So that was an administrative operating cost charge that is no longer needed.
So that-
Wow
... is one saving area. Drug and alcohol assessment costs, which is demand-driven,
that was a savings area. And the rail grants for Hillside down to
Dunedin, due to greater efficiencies, that was a savings area.
But so going to your point, was there savings in terms of-
Further headcount reductions,
that wasn't part of those three initiatives
In terms of reduction of AI initiatives?
No, the ministry is continuing
to efficiencies everyone would expect.
At the moment, we're running a headcount of 186.
'24, '25 was 206. There's reasons
for that
change. One is the dynamics of recruiting people and
delays.
We are using AI more within the
organization, but that's not a direct link to
that was small fall in headcounts.
And for Waka Kotahi?
Similar answer. So AI not directly linked to any headcount reduction.
However, we are looking at lots of opportunities for using AI to become more
efficient. We've got lots of use cases that we're trialing in the organization now,
but not resulting in headcount reduction.
We have had headcount reduction, but that is all focused on efficiency, what
we do, doing things faster and smarter over the last 12 months, and
we're constantly looking for those opportunities.
Thank you.
Okay. And look, I might follow this one up with the written questions, but
just quickly, just satisfaction with the contracts you have with
police in terms of their road safety policing. That's all going well.
You're very clear about what you're getting from police.
Yeah. Do you want to comment on that, Richard?
Rick Forgan, NZTA.
Thank you.
Yes. Well, obviously there was the breast screening issue earlier this year.
That has now been resolved and numbers reduced following the
police's analysis and then the independent analysis that was performed on top of
that.
The KPIs for a number of the measures in
the police contract are going up this year, proposed to go up, and
we are now starting to work with police on what the next three-year period will
look like, what the focus of that as it will be.
Look, thank you all. It's quite a long session.
You've given us a lot of information.
Quite clearly there are going to be quite a number of questions, follow-up
questions of detail, and we look forward to the answers to those. Thank you.
Really appreciate it. Thank you.
Thank you.
Great work.
And best wishes to all the, particularly the MOT team, as you
go into the brave new world of MCERTs.
Yeah. I look forward to it. Thank you.
Thank you.
And colleagues, we are back here in-
Are you working this afternoon?
Yes.
I think
we're inspecting a report.
It can wait until after KiwiRail.
Yeah, we'll do it after KiwiRail. So yeah. Yep. Cool.
Is it all right if I leave my stuff here?
Yep.
Yeah.